    Sasha's List of Lists    - Version 1.7     June 7, 1996.
    ---------------------

Note: I am not actively updating this ascii listing now.
I have been incorporating the changes reported to me though.
My hypertext mailing list guide is available at
http://www.lucifer.com/~sasha/lists.html

  The following is a selection of about 100 mailing list descriptions,
contact addresses and related data. I expect the entries below to be
of some interest to people who I may like.

  Mostly, these lists discuss the frontier scientific, technological and
philosophical concepts, futurist ideas, promote ideas of liberty, economic
freedom, various alternative intellectual activities and lifestyles,
advanced educational concepts, etc.

  Some of the descriptions below can be found in the periodic posting of 
the general list of mailing lists currently maintained by Stephanie da
Silva <arielle@taronga.com>. You can find it on newsgroups: news.lists,
news.answers, together with usage instructions. (The total number of
lists advertised there is approaching a thousand).
  It is also accessible through the World Wide Web:

      URL: http://www.ii.uib.no/cgi-bin/paml

  However, that 'superlist' is incomplete, partly because many list
managers neglect to advertise their lists in it. - If you are a list
manager and have any interest in expanding your virtual community, you
should consider advertising it. 
  So for a good portion of entries below I had to do some searching.   
This list is an attempt to ease this path for you.

  The length and quality of the list description below do not necessarily
correspond to the quality of the list itself. I just offer all the relevant
information I could find. 

  My personal favorites among lists of general interest, for high level
of discussion and low noise, are the extropian lists, fringeware and
general semantics.

  I will try to improve this list, so any comments are welcome.
If you want to have anything added to, removed from, or changed in
this list, please talk to me:
        
         sasha1@netcom.com 

  I will do my best to support and update this list, but I do not commit
to anything, except removing the information that the list owners may
consider private. I am doing my best to avoid such situations though. 


   If you have a list that you want added to general USENET posting, send
a request to arielle@taronga.com. Include the list name, contact (request)
address and a brief description of your list in the format of the mailing
lists already included.

  I am very grateful to people who sent me mailing list info, to people
who will do it in future and to everybody who maintains all these lists
and posts to them.

  I consider these discussion groups to be one of the most magnificent
bodies of knowledge development that has ever existed, and hope that my
modest connectionist effort will help the cross-pollination of their ideas.

  Please treat these groups with due respect.
If you are not familiar with a mailing list or its topics you may want
to read the faq/charter/archives before joining the discussion. 

  Please feel free to share this list or its parts with people whose
contact with the listed discussion groups you may expect to be mutually
beneficial. 


           Alexander "Sasha" Chislenko  <sasha1@netcom.com>
 
==========================================================================
  Version 1.00 of this list was created on  August 10, 1994

  Main changes since then:
(check them out if you have an earlier version)

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
-
    List         |               Description
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
-
V. 1.10:

    AP-L          - List for Advanced Placement Teachers
    CPSR-announce - Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility events
    FutureCulture - wide array of topics on the future of society
    OSG           - electronic Objectivism Study Group.
    PSYCHE-L      - electronic journal on the nature of consciousness and
                    its relation to the brain
    PSYCHE-D      - a moderated discussion group associated with PSYCHE-L
    wny-pagan     - Western NY Pagan Happenings pagan sub-list

V.1.2:

   logo-friends  - removed. The list seems to no longer exist
   biversity     - corrected the information

V. 1.25:  (Aug, 19, 1994)

   GS           - added descriptions of the general semantics list
   CUD          - expanded info on Computer Underground Digest list.

V.  1.3:  (Sep. 15, 1994)  added:

   AR           - Achiever Report - discussion of achievement motivations
   CYBERMIND    - Philosophical and psychological implications of cyberspace 
   ICSI-talk    - International Computer Science Institute talk announcements 
   NOVIS        - Discussion of Novis project (self-improvement techniques)
   OFFSHORE     - Asset Protection & Financial Planning list
   PRJ          - New Paradigms mailing list
   SETIQuest    - Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence
   SLRS         - Society for Long Range Studies 
   WFS-TALK     - World Future Society list (added description)

V 1.4:   (Oct. 24, 1994)

   CSICOP       - The Committee for the Scientific Investigation of Claims
                  of the Paranormal - added info.
   HotFlash     - list name and subscription info changed (was "HotWired")
   LONGEVITY    - Discussion of various ways to extend human life. (added)
   OMEGA        - Omega - Swedish transhumanist mailing list

V. 1.5:  (Nov. 25, 1994)
   
   CAOM                 - California Odyssey of the Mind educational program
   DEOS-L               - The Distance Education Online Symposium
   Oceania              - New free country in the Caribbean mailing list
   STC                  - Stanford Theory Colloquium.
   wholesys-l           - Whole Systems mailing list

   NOTE:  address of this file changed (see above)

V 1.6   (December 25, 1994)  - last serious update

   Bionomics        - The Bionomics Institute mailing list and newsletter
   Biotech                   - Biotechnology mailing list
   cpsr-[xxx]                - added a family of CPSR mailing lists
   CyberMind                 - address changed
   DigitaLiberty             - The Digital Liberty Forum
   Digital Media Perspective - Free biweekly newsletter
   EDTECPOL                  - Conference on Educational Technology Policy
   Fiction-of-Philosophy
   INNS-L                    - International Neural Network Society list
   JEI-L                     - Technology in Education Mailing List
   Leri-L                    - (subscription info changed)

V. 1.7  (June 7, 1996)

    Updated the header of this file.

    Biversity                - Changed subscription info

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Also, many changes were made to other entries, comments, etc.


I am grateful to:

Bob Stubblefield    <bobs@osg.com>,
Craig Presson       <fcp@nuance.com>
Dave Krieger        <dkrieger@netcom.com>,
Eric S. Raymond     <esr@locke.ccil.org>,
Elizabeth Schwartz  <betsys@cs.umb.edu>,
Emory Menefee       <em@crl.com>,
Felix Ungman        <felix@hu.se>,
Flemming Funch          <ffunch@netcom.com>,
James Daugherty     <jhdaugh@a-albionic.com>,
                    <JBOWMAN@sunbelt.net>,
John McPherson      <mcpherso@lumina.ucsd.edu>,
John P Onorato      <wizard@bga.com>,,
Katie Hammett Hall  <khhall@mail.wm.edu>,
Patrick M.Fitzgerald<fitz@iquest.com>,
Patrick Wilken      <X91007@pitvax.xx.rmit.edu.au>,
Phil Safier         <safier@unm.edu>,
Richard Kennaway    <jrk@sys.uea.ac.uk>,
Richard Plourde     <rplourde@leotech.mv.com>,
Ron Hale-Evans      <rwhe@netcom.com>,
Romana Machado      <machado@newton.apple.com>,
Trond Buland        <Trond.Buland@ifim.sintef.no>

 for the information I used for the updates.

==========================================================================

agorics

    Agoric systems (computational economies) mailing list
    Currently seems dormant.

    agorics@netcom.com

albion

    New Paradigms Project / albionic research
    Ruling class / global conspiracy theories

    E-mail James Daugherty (jhdaugh@msen.mail.com) to subscribe

    James Daugherty, volunteer Postmaster for A-albionic Research, a ruling
    class/conspiracy research resource for the entire political-ideological
    spectrum.  Quarterly journal, book sales, rare/out-of-print searches, and
    custom research since 1984.  Introductory information and free articles
    and catalogs are located in the New Paradigms section of the Msen Market
    Place (Gopher) and Msen ftp site. ftp.msen.com (/pub/vendor/a-albionic)

    For those without Gopher or ftp Service or to be added to our Weekly
    Up-date List: e-mail jhdaugh@mail.msen.com, fax 1-313-885-1181, or A-A
    Research, POB 20273, Ferndale, MI 48220 (Snail mail info pack on 
request).

Aleph

      The following is a part of Aleph FAQ v1.5 explaining the basic
    structure of Aleph interests.  It was too good to be edited.
    The rest of the FAQ can be found at ftp.netcom.com in pub/aleph
    together with lots of other aleph texts.

                                 FAX
                                /   \
                             FIX --- FOX

    FIX (Fictual/Interactive/eXpressive): We are attempting to create an
    unprecedented, open-ended global interactive artwork which we refer
    to as FIXION, utilizing the Internet as both a creative medium and
    quasifictional context, for the purposes of evoking the artist in all
    of us, and for testing the possibility of changing reality through
    fiction. FIXION may be seen as a fusion of NetWorking and RolePlaying.

       FOX (Factual/Ontological/eXpositive): We are attempting to conglom
    a continually-scientifically-evolving, rigorous system of ontological
    and epistemological data for use in predicting and/or guiding the fate
    of humanity.  In order to accomplish this, we must examine as many
    ontological models as we can find; "scientific" or "mystical," ancient
    or modern, sacred or profane.  We must translate, learn, correlate,
    and unify them all.  We seek FOXIENCE.  The Rosetta Stone.

        FAX (Fluxual/Ambiknostic/eXegesive): The two focii explained above
    may be considered diametrically opposed (and indeed are intended that
    way), because we need to attract input from both "creative/intuitive"
    people and "analytical/scientific" people.  We are aware that most
    people fall into one or the other of these groups, and are often
    unable to understand the terms used by the other, or the contexts
    in which such terms are used.  This "babel-effect" has stymied and
    separated the intuitive and metaphysical arts from the physical and
    psychic sciences for two thousand years.  Now that the findings of
    Quantum Physicists are beginning to coequal the pithy aphorisms of
    the Mystics, and even as the hypothesized Singularity draws near,
    it is high time to attempt their union into a single, relativistic,
    globally-available model.

       At current there are several models which are being used as the
    skeletii of this memestruct, which we call The AAleph.  These include,
    but are not limited to, Terence McKenna's *TimeWave Zero*, the
    Qabalistic Tree of Life (with a large dash of Crowleyanity), the Tarot
    Deck, the eight-circuit structure of Timothy Leary (expanded by R.A.
    Wilson), Buckminster Fuller's *Synergetics*, Jungian *Synchronicity*,
    *The Dictionary of the Khazars*, *The Gurdjieff Work*, Alchemical and
    Rosicrucian texts, the Periodic Table of Elements, various cognitive
    models of consciousness, and the entirety of recorded art, history
    and science.
    
    There are archives of Aleph '93 at netcom.com, in /pub/aleph.

    Now the list appears to have somewhat drifted away from it's original
    topics, and is mostly a low volume discussion of quantum mechanics
    and theories of consciousness, which has been a perennial topic all
    this year.

    To subscribe to aleph, send the following in the body (not the subject
    line) of an email message to "Majordomo@gossip.pyramid.com":

        subscribe aleph

    This will subscribe the account from which you send the message to
    the aleph list.

    If you wish to subscribe another address instead (such as a local
    redistribution list), you can use a command of the form:

        subscribe aleph other-address@your_site.your_net

    If you feel you need to reach a human, send email to

        aleph-approval@gossip.pyramid.com


algo-comp
    Algorithmic [music] composition mailing list

    This is a forum for issues concerning the creation of musical
    compositions using algorithmic processes.
    Some examples of topics for discussion include:

    *  specific works and composers
    *  implementation of algorithms
    *  philosophical and aesthetic issues

    To subscribe to the list, send email to
        majordom@heinous.isca.uiowa.edu.
    The following line should be in the body (not the subject)
    of the message:

    subscribe algo-comp

    To send a message to the list, mail it to:
         algo-comp@heinous.isca.uiowa.edu

    Administrator:  Dr. Kirk Corey   <kirk-corey@uiowa.edu>

    Files available via anonymous ftp at heinous.isca.uiowa.edu,
    /ftp/pub/algo-comp.

    Files may be submitted to /ftp/pub/upload.
    Please include a descriptive .txt file with uploads.

alife
    Contact: alife-request@cognet.ucla.edu

    Purpose: The alife mailing list is for communications regarding
    artificial life, a formative interdisciplinary field involving
    computer science, the natural sciences, mathematics, medicine and
    others.  The recent book _Artificial Life_, Christopher Langton, ed.,
    Addison Wesley, 1989 introduces the scope of artificial life as a field
    of study.  Alife was chartered in February 1990 at the Second Artificial
    Life Workshop, held in Santa Fe & organized by the Center for Nonlinear
    Studies at the Los Alamos National Laboratory and the Santa Fe
    Institute.  The list is intended primarily for low-volume, high-content
    scientific correspondence and as a publically accessible forum for the
    interested members of the public.  Membership as of July 1990 includes
    over 1,200 addresses on four continents.  There is an FTP-accessible
    archives/repository of past traffic, software and papers.  The list
    is maintained by the Artificial Life Research Group, Computer Science
    Department, Lindley Hall 101, Indiana University Bloomington, IN 47405.
    There are conditions on redistribution of the list in order to minimize
    any misunderstanding or exaggeration concerning this new area of study.

AltInst
    Contact: AltInst-request@cs.cmu.edu (Robin Hanson)

    Purpose: You are invited to joint "AltInst", a new email list on
    Alternative Institutions.  AltInst is solely for proposing and
    critiquing alternative institutions for various walks of life.
    Alternative ways to run conversations, countries, households, markets,
    offices, romances, schools, etc. are all fair game.

    AltInst is open to folks from any political persuasion, but general
    political flaming/discussion is forbidden.  Skip the theory and just
    tell us your vision of how something could be different, and how that
    would work. Many of us are truly excited to hear about creative well-
    considered suggestions, no matter what the source, but quickly bored
    by both ideological is-to-is-not flaming, and partisan rah-rahs for
    anything "politically correct" in some camp. 

ALTMED

        A FORUM FOR THE DISCUSSION OF RESEARCH IN ALTERNATIVE MEDICINE

        altmed-res@virginia.edu

    TO SUBSCRIBE: Send the message

        subscribe altmed-res <address>

    to majordomo@virginia.edu

     This list was created to promote discussion and collaboration in the
   emerging field of alternative medicine research. The term "alternative"
   is used for the sake of convenience. Many of the therapies currently
   under study such as biofeedback, hypnosis, and guided imagery, have
   already accumulated a substantial body of research. Others such as
   ayurvedic, chinese medicine, and massage, are traditional therapies
   that have been used for centuries in many parts of the world. In the
   US, approximately one third of Americans use therapies such relaxation
   techniques, chiropractic, and massage, often in conjunction with
   conventional medical treatment. Research is currently underway to
   investigate the safety, efficacy, and validity of these therapies.

   I invite participation from academically trained researchers,
   alternative practitioners, and health care consumers who wish
   to share research findings, clinical case notes or studies, and
   philosophical views regarding:

        * past or current research
        * meetings, conferences and conventions about research in
            alternative medicine 
        * research methods: design issues, paradigm fit, or
            statistical questions
        * potential collaborations

   We are a diverse, interdisciplinary group, and have much to
   contribute and learn from one another. For more information
   or if you have any questions, please write the list owner,

     Martha Brown Menard     <mbm2y@Virginia.edu>

AP-L
        List for Advanced Placement Teachers

    AP-L is an open, unmoderated discussion list for teachers of advanced
    placement courses.  AP-L is used for posting questions, lesson ideas
    and providing help for other AP teachers.  Students taking AP Courses
    are also welcome.

    To subscribe, send the following command in the body of E-mail to
        
        LISTSERV@GITVM1 or LISTSERV@GITVM1.GATECH.EDU:

      Sub AP-L yourfirstname yourlastname

    Example:

      Sub AP-L Joe Shmoe

AR  -  ACHIEVER REPORT.

     The ACHIEVER REPORT is published bi-monthly (sometimes monthly).
    It focuses on the cognitive and emotional impediments to achievement
    motivation (and there are many). The newsletter includes papers from
    various sources, original papers, subscriber submissions, questions and
    answers, and book recommendations and reviews.

    E-mail MoreMind@AOL.COM to subscribe

    To unsubscribe, send an e-mail message to MoreMind@aol.com and put
    UNSUB AR SUBS within the body of the message.

Arlist
    Contact: arlist-request@psych.psy.uq.oz.au  (Bob Dick)

    Purpose: Arlist is an open unmoderated mailing list to provide a
    forum for discussing action research and its use in a variety of
    disciplines and situations.

    As its name implies, action research is often a suitable research
    paradigm when both action outcomes and research outcomes required.
    It is usually (but perhaps not always) cyclic, participative, and
    qualitative. 

    Appropriate topics include (but are not limited to) --
    o  philosophical and methodological issues in action research
    o  specific action research methodologies and methods
    o  the use of action research for evaluation
    o  actual case studies of action research
    o  the use of action research methodologies for thesis research
    o  increasing the rigour of action research

    To subscribe email a message to arlist-request@psych.psy.uq.oz.au
    with the subject    arlist subscribe   and the message
        subscribe arlist your-name your_email_address

    Selected materials are archived at psych.psy.uq.oz.au.  They
    are available by anonymous ftp in directory pub/ar-list.

 AUtopia
        ______ A U t o p i a  P r o j e c t ________

    This list is dedicated to the discussion of creating an intentional
    high-tech community on the high seas.

    To join/leave or recieve info about the list, send email to:

        autopia-request@wixer.cactus.org

    To post a message to the list, send email to:

        autopia@wixer.cactus.org

    This is a semi-moderated list combined with an automated file/list server.
    If the first line of your message is a special command, the mailer
    will respond back to you.  These are the commands:

        subscribe / add      ..to join the list
        unsubscribe / drop   ..to leave the list
        list                 ..to list the available files
        send [file]          ..to send you the file name "FILE"
        help                 ..to send you THIS FILE (same as "send readme")

    For example, if your were to send the following message:

        To: autopia-request@wixer.cactus.org

        send faq

   You would receive a copy of the AUtopia FAQ the next day after the
    nightly batch file runs.

    Only one command per email message can be interpreted so far.
    Our archives are based on a Unix system, so the file listings will be
    Unix-style.

    Administrator:
                 Jagwire X <jagwire@wixer.cactus.org>


ba-liberty
    Contacts: majordomo@shell.portal.com  (Jeff Chan, owner)
              ba-liberty-owner@shell.portal.com
    Purpose: Announcement of San Francisco Bay Area libertarian
             meetings, events, activities, etc.

bionomics

   How is new technology transforming the economy?  How will it alter the 
   fundamental qualities of economic life?

   We don't have all the answers.  But we do have a powerful new way to
   look at the the revolutionary changes brought about by the emergence
   of the Information Age.  And, we have leading edge thinkers and doers
   from a remarkable variety of disciplines -- high-technology, biology,
   economics, public policy, business and more -- who share the powerful
   idea that the economy is an ecosystem.

   That's right:  the economy is _not_ some giant machine.  It's like a 
   rainforest.  A virtual rainforest where coded information, like DNA,
   defies entropy. Where organizations (like organisms) cooperate, compete
   and evolve in a complex, self-organizing process that is not only
   unplanned, but unplan-able. (Sounds like the Internet, doesn't it.)

   And, now, we have a discussion group:  evolve@bionomics.org.

   As well as an occasional newsletter:   just.the.facts@bionomics.org.

   JOINING -- send to info@bionomics.org with "SUBSCRIBE Evolve" or
                          "SUBSCRIBE Just.the.facts" in the subject line.
   Participants in "Evolve" will get "just.the.facts" automatically.

   CONTRIBUTING -- send to evolve@bionomics.org.  This is an archived, 
                quasi-moderated discussion. Signal-to-noise will be kept high.

   VANISHING -- send "unsubscribe" or any questions to info@bionomics.org
   or to our domain postmaster, klacobie@bionomics.org.

Biotech 

    BIOTECH is an bulletin board dedicated to the free exchange
    of ideas and data concerning biotechnology.   All topics and
    announcements concerning biotechnology are welcome.

    If you have any question about the BIOTECH list, write to the list
    owners at the generic address:

        BIOTECH-Request@UMDD.UMD.EDU

     Owner=  dan@umdd.umd.edu  (Dan Jacobs)

Bits-n-Bytes

    BITS AND BYTES ONLINE EDITION, an electronic newsletter for text-based
    lifeforms, is published irregularly. Correspondence regarding Bits and
    Bytes Online Edition is always welcome and may be sent to to:
    JAYMACHADO@delphi.com

    Bits and Bytes Online Edition will contain news of interest to anyone
    interested in the state of the increasingly high-tech world we're
    living in, in the computer industry, and more importantly in the
    *future*. We examine how future technology will impact our public and
    private lives, and how we can learn (maybe) to use to use our skills
    and technologies wisely. We explore the impact of technology on
    society and vice versa.

    SUBSCRIBING AND UNSUBSCRIBING: To subscribe send a message to
    listserv@acad1.dana.edu, no subject, text: SUBSCRIBE bits-n-bytes To
    unsubscribe send a message to listserv@acad1.dana.edu, no subject,
    text: UNSUBSCRIBE bits-n-bytes

BIVERSITY

    The list is for the purpose of announcing upcoming events
    of interest to the bisexual community in New England.
    
    The list address is:

           biversity@blank.org

    and the administrative address (to subscribe or unsubscribe) is

           biversity-request@blank.org
                
    Subscription requests should contain the word "subscribe" on a line
    by itself in the message body.

    Traffic is pretty low except for brief periods before major LGB
    events. (Pride Day, e.g.)  The Boston Biversity Calendar is posted
    monthly. 
    
    Contact: Nathan Mehl <nmehl@blank.org>

blister
    Contact: majordomo@world.std.com

    Purpose: Just lists of people's favorite/least favorite books.
    Find someone whose taste matches yours and you find a bunch of books
    you'll probably enjoy.  No discussion of books.

    For info, send mail to the contact address, with "info blister" on a
    line by itself in the BODY (not Subject:) 
    of the letter.  To subscribe, send mail to the contact
    address with "subscribe blister" on a line by itself in
    the body of the letter.

ca-liberty
    Contacts: majordomo@shell.portal.com  (Jeff Chan, owner)
              ca-liberty-owner@shell.portal.com
    Purpose: Announcement of California libertarian meetings,
    events, activities, etc.  See also ba-liberty for separate
    local San Francisco Bay Area libertarian announcements.

CAOM    

    - California Odyssey of the Mind educational program

    Subscription address:

                CAOM-Request@SJSUVM1.SJSU.EDU

            Owner=kwan@sjsuvm1.SJSU.EDU (Stephen Kwan)

castaneda
    
    The list is no longer active.  There is an archive of the
    list and some related materials (including an extensive bibliography)
    available via anonymous ftp to earth.com in pub/archive/cc.

CEI
    - Competitive Enterprise Institute

    Contact: cei@digex.com (Alexander "Sasha" Volokh)

    Purpose:  The CEI mailing list, created by the Competitive Enterprise
    Institute, distributes CEI op-ed pieces and other materials.
      Founded in 1984,  the Competitive Enterprise Institute is committed
    to advancing the principles of free enterprise and limited government.
      The Institute is founded on the belief that free markets individual
    liberty best serve the public interest by providing freedom of choice
    and equal opportunity. 

conlang
    Contact: listserv@diku.dk

    Purpose: The conlang mailing list is devoted to a discussion of any
    and all constructed languages  (also known  as artificial languages, 
    planned languages, etc). If you want to publicize your own language,
    or if you need  help finding information about  some other language
    project,  or if you want to discuss  the relative merits of various
    tongues, conlang is the place to be!

     To join, send a message to listserv@diku.dk containing the text
    "subscribe conlang".

Connectionists

    Contact:      Connectionists-Request@cs.cmu.edu
    Main address: Connectionists@cs.cmu.edu

    Moderators: Dave Touretzky, David Redish

     Connectionists is a restricted mailing list primarily intended for
    discussion of technical issues relating to neural computation, and
    dissemination of information directly relevant to researchers in the
    field. It is NOT a public digest like AIList or the NEURON digest;
    membership is restricted to students and faculty members who are
    actively involved in connectionist research. If you would kindly send
    a list of your papers or other activities in this area, we will be
    glad to add you to the list.  Please include your full name.

conspire

     Conspiracy Nation mailing list.

    To subscribe, send a message to listproc@prairienet.org

    with:

      subscribe conspire My Name

    in its body

    Maintainer:

     Brian Francis Redman    bigxc@prairienet.org    "The Big C"

cpsr-announce

     Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility event list

    Founded in 1981, CPSR has 1800 members from all over the United States
    and 21 chapters. CPSR is an important participant in the dialogue that
    is helping to shape the future use of computers in the United States.
    CPSR's National Advisory Board includes one Nobel laureate and three
    winners of the Turing Award, the highest honor in computer science.
    CPSR published the influential report "Serving the Community" on
    policy issues in the National Information Infrastructure, and is an
    active participant in the Telecommunications Policy Roundtable in
    Washington. 
     CPSR has been instrumental in a lot of the anti-Clipper mobilization,
    for example, and the opposition to the various Digital Telephony
    initiatives.

    CPSR seems to define the "social responsibility" as "socialist
    responsibility", however, and in general leans too far leftwards.

    To help support or steer CPSR's activities, you may subscribe to the
    cpsr-announce list by contacting its listserver address:
        
        listserv@Sunnyside.COM

    The address of the list itself is:

        cpsr-announce@Sunnyside.COM

    The same listserv@Sunnyside.COM can also provide you with info on 30+
    other CPSR mailing lists, including:

    cpsr-global@cpsr.org          Discussion of Global CPSR Issues
    cpsr-palo-alto-members@cpsr.org   CPSR Palo Alto chapter Announcements
    cpsr-library@cpsr.org             CPSR discussion of the Internet
                                        Library
    cyberjournal@cpsr.org             Moore's CPSR PA Chapter Cyber Journal
    ethics@cpsr.org                   CPSR Internal Ethics Working Group 
    gii-doc@cpsr.org                  CPSR Global Issues Document Group
    nl-kr-mods@ai.sunnyside.com       Natural Language / Knowledge
                                      Representation Digest 
                                      = comp.ai.nlang-know-rep
    cpsr-berkeley-members@cpsr.org    discussion to all CPSR/Berkeley members
    cpsr-boston-members@cpsr.org      discussion to all CPSR/Boston members
    cpsr-boston-announce@cpsr.org     genl announcements
                                            (includes cpsr-boston-members)
    cpsr-nii@cpsr.org                 CPSR NII Members NII Discussions

                
cryonics
    Contact: kqb@whscad1.att.com   (Kevin Q. Brown)

    Purpose: Cryonic suspension is an experimental procedure whereby
    patients who can no longer be kept alive with today's medical
    abilities are preserved at low temperatures for treatment in the
    future.  This list is a forum for topics related to cryonics, which
    include biochemistry of memory, low temperature biology, legal status
    of cryonics and cryonically suspended people, nanotechnology and cell
    repair machines, philosophy of identity, mass media coverage of
    cryonics, new research and publications, conferences, and local
    cryonics group meetings. 

CSICOP 
    - The Committee for the Scientific Investigation of Claims Of the
    Paranormal (CSICOP), publisher of _Skeptical Inquirer_ magazine, now
    has a World Wide Web site at the following URL: 

        http://iquest.com/~fitz/csicop/

    Includes online interfaces for subscribing to the CSICOP mailing list,
    links for subscribing to _Skeptical Inquirer_, and links to other Web
    sites. 

    [The following is the "About CSICOP" page]

    The more serious-minded among us ask what is going on. Why the sudden
    explosion of interest, even among some otherwise sensible people, in
    all sorts of paranormal "happenings"? Are we in retreat from the
    scientific ideas of rationality, dispassionate examination of evidence,
    and sober experiment that have made modern civilization what it is
    today? 
   
    For a long time, the raising and answering of such questions have been
    left to commentators and journalists. Eighteen years ago, scientists
    started to fight back. They set up an organization - the Committee for
    the Scientific Investigation of Claims of the Paranormal - to
    investigate unusual phenomena. 

    Contact: Barry Karr (aa538@freenet.buffalo.edu)
 
CUDigest
        Computer Underground Digest list

       Computer Underground Digest is a forum for the discussion of legal,
    ethical, social, and other issues regarding computerized information
    and communications. 
       It welcomes contributions reflecting diversity of thought and
    perspective.
  
    The broad goal of CuD is to provide a forum for discussion and debate
    of the computer telecommunications culture.   This culture especially
    includes, but is not limited to, the unique world of BBSes, Internet,
    and public access systems.  We focus especially on alternative groups
    that exist outside of the conventional net community. We try to focus
    on a broad range of issues that include news,debates of legal,ethical
    and technical issues, and scholarly research of relevance to  a broad
    audience of professionals and lay persons.   Other than  providing  a
    context for an article if necessary,  the moderators   *DO NOT*   add
    commentary of agreement or disagreement.   We see our role  as one of
    facilitating debate,  although  we may  take part  in discussions  in
    separate articles. 

    Subscription address:

    CUDIGEST-Request@VMD.CSO.UIUC.EDU

    List manager: Jim Thomas <TK0JUT2@NIU.BITNET>
    
    To send a message to all the people currently subscribed to the list,
    send mail to CUDIGEST@VMD.CSO.UIUC.EDU.
    
    All commands must be sent to

        LISTSERV@UIUCVMD.BITNET (or LISTSERV@VMD.CSO.UIUC.EDU)

CYBERMIND

    AN ELECTRONIC FORUM FOR THE DISCUSSION OF THE PHILOSOPHICAL AND
    PSYCHOLOGICAL IMPLICATIONS OF SUBJECTIVITY IN CYBERSPACE


    We are all dwelling in cyberspace, coursing through the wires,
    becoming cyborg and becoming human. We are subjects of a realm
    which is totally charted, and completely unknown. CYBER-MIND is
    devoted to an examination of the new subjectivities that have
    emerged and might yet emerge in this arena. We are interested in
    particular in the philosophical, psychological/psychoanalytic and
    social issues engendered, particularly as they concern the user
    and the social. 

    Some issues that might be relevant: the psychology of intimacy,
    the role of gender, the phenomenology of the terminal screen,
    neurosis and paranoia on the Net, the relationship of lag to
    community and communi- cation, sex/gender/sexual orientation
    theory and electronic subjectivity, the role of the symbolic or
    imaginary in computer communication, the implications of symbolic
    extensions of the human ("external memory", and so forth), fantasy
    and the hallucinatory aspects of email/USENET groups/MUDs, and the
    psychoanalysis of lurking. 

    This is an "open list" - posts on all aspects of the above issues
    and more will be welcomed. It is open to general discussion, group
    readings of published works, and the sharing and critique of 
    participants' works-in-progress. We want to stress, however, that
    our intent is to explore these issues in the broadest sense. 
    Discussions focused on IRC, MUD's/MOO's, Virtual Reality, etc. are
    already readily available on the Internet.  While it is perfectly
    acceptable to discuss these issues when relevant, we do wish to
    discourage threads that are too narrowly limited to any particular
    medium or "sub-realm" of cyberspace. Similarly, while critical
    examination of cyberpunk literature can yield important insights,
    and we welcome discussion of work in that genre, "fan"-type
    discussions of cyberpunk, of the type available on alt.cyberpunk,
    etc., are not appropriate on this list. 

    One concern we hope to address is the way in which much
    theoretical work on cyberspace to date reflects an exclusive,
    hegemonic bias, thus foreclosing some of the most interesting
    and radical of possibilities for the development of Net culture.
    We want to challenge ourselves and the list members to integrate
    issues of race, sex, class and multiculturalism in our efforts to
    think cyberspace together. 

    We believe this list will be an important forum for opening up new
    perspectives on cyberspace and cyberculture, and are anxious and
    excited to begin a dialogue with all interested parties on the
    types of issues we have described here.  Our list is open to all
    interested parties, be they academics, Net "technicians," or
    ordinary citizens of cyberspace who wish to join us in thinking
    and discussing the present and future of this fascinating,
    exciting, and sometimes frustrating realm - and, ultimately, of
    ourselves. 

    CYBERMIND is brought to you by the Spoon Collective, a group of
    Net citizens devoted to free and open discussion of philosophical
    issues on the Internet.  Based on the Collective's philosophy,
    PLEASE BE AWARE THAT POSTS CONTAINING LANGUAGE OR DEALING WITH
    SUBJECT MATTER THAT SOME MIGHT FIND OFFENSIVE MAY APPEAR ON THE
    LIST FROM TIME TO TIME, AND SUCH POSTS WILL NOT BE CENSORED.
    However, we would also like you to know that racial or other bias
    slurs will not be tolerated; there are other sites on the Internet
    for them. 

    To subscribe, send the message: subscribe cybermind <address>
    to majordomo@jefferson.village.virginia.edu
    
    To send a post, send to: cybermind@jefferson.village.virginia.edu

    To unsubscribe, send the message: unsubscribe cybermind <address>

    If you have any difficulties, or more general questions, contact
    the list-owner: sondheim@panix.com

    Please note that we plan to have archives available with ftp;
    watch for the announcement! There are also files available from
    Marius Watz' World Wide Web site in Norway at
    http://www.uio.no/~mwatz/cybermind/ - often updated.


CYBSYS-L
    Cybernetics and systems theory

    cybsys-l@bingvmb.bitnet

     This list is intended to serve all those working in or just interes-
    ted in the fields of Systems Science, Cybernetics, and related fields
    (e.g. General Systems Theory, Complex Systems Theory, Dynamic Systems
    Theory, Computer Modeling and Simulation, Control Theory, Operations
    Research, Network Theory, Self-Organizing Systems Theory, Information
    Theory, Fuzzy Set Theory). 

     The list is moderated by members of the Systems Science department
    of the Watson School at SUNY-Binghamton, and is affiliated with the
    International Society for the Systems Sciences (ISSS) and the American
    Society for Cybernetics (ASC).

     All kinds of postings are  welcome, including discussion, argument,
    suggestions for improving the list/file server, calls for papers,
    conference announcements, computer programs, and requests for
    references and literature.

   Moderator:

      CYBSYS@BINGVAXU.CC.BINGHAMTON.EDU

   Contact for comment/suggestions:

      Cliff Joslyn, cjoslyn@bingvaxu.cc.binghamton.edu

cypherpunks

    The cypherpunks list is a forum for discussing personal defenses for
    privacy in the digital domain.  It is a high volume mailing list.
    There is no digest version available.

    For subscription info, contact

        cypherpunks-request@toad.com

    List manager: Eric Hughes <hughes@toad.com>


    There is an announcements list which is moderated and has low volume.
    Announcements for physical cypherpunks meetings, new software and
    important developments will be posted there.  Mail to

        cypherpunks-announce-request@toad.com

    if you want to be added to or removed from the announce list.

    All announcements also go out to the full cypherpunks list,
    so there is no need to subscribe to both.

DEOS-L   Distance Education Online Symposium

        Owner: owner-DEOS-L@PSUVM.PSU.EDU,
    acsde@psuvm (American Center for Study of Distance Education)
  
    Subscription requests:        DEOS-L-Request@PSUVM.PSU.EDU

     The American Center for the Study of Distance Education at The
    Pennsylvania State University organizes DEOS and publishes The American
    Journal of Distance Education.  Our goal is to integrate the electronic
    medium and the printed medium to serve professionals and students in the
    field of distance education.

DigitaLiberty 
   
     The DigitaLiberty Forum is a place where like minded individuals can 
   share their views, observations, and strategies related to the development
   of virtual communities based on freedom.  It is a place where people can
   exchange information and advice about how they have developed extra-
   territorial business and social relationships - away from the influence
   and outside the jurisdiction of governments.  It is a forum for the
   posting of essays, questions, and ideas on the topic of liberty. It is
   a place where we can meet and debate the forms that our new institutions
   might take and discuss the practical problems and responsibilities that 
   freedom entail.

   In time as our technology matures some of us will move on to more ambitious
   projects, launch other programs, and begin our virtual migration from 
   the swamp of coerced collectivism.  Best of all, there will be no need to
   physically move to 'Galt's Gulch' or escape to a floating 'Freedonia'. 
   We can all participate in this exodus without hastily quitting our jobs or
   disrupting our lives.  And as a larger and larger portion of our economic
   and social activities move onto the net we will create a new society, open
   to all with the will to enter.  This new world will be interleaved with
   the physical world in which we now live and yet will be separate. And free.

   The DigitaLiberty Forum is open to anyone that can honestly make the
   following two statements:

   1)  I renounce the use of coercive force as a tool of social or economic
       policy.

   2)  I do not derive the majority of my income from funds taken from
       taxpayers.

       If you qualify, send a message to DigitaLiberty-request@phantom.com
   (or listproc@phantom.com ?) with the words "SUBSCRIBE" in the subject
   line and the message body as follows

   SUBSCRIBE DigitaLiberty <your name>

Digital Media Perspective  

   A new fortnightly electronics newsletter published by
   Digital Media: A Seybold Report.

   If you are interested in receiving DMP regularly, please send email
   to perspective-request@digmedia.com and put "subscribe perspective"
   in the subject field. In the message's body please put your full name;
   we would appreciate it if you would also include your title and
   organization in the message. We promise that we will not share this
   information with anyone outside of Digital Media.

EDTECPOL -  Conference on Educational Technology Policy

   If you  have any question about  the EDTECPOL
   list, write to the list owners at the generic address:

         EDTECPOL-Request@UMDD.UMD.EDU

EPIC  Alert

      Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC) list

       The Electronic Privacy Information Center is a public interest
    research center in Washington, DC.  It was established in 1994 to
    focus public attention on emerging privacy issues relating to the
    National Information Infrastructure, such as the Clipper Chip, the
    Digital Telephony proposal, medical record privacy, and the sale of
    consumer data.  EPIC is sponsored by the Fund for Constitutional
    Government and Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility.
    EPIC publishes the EPIC Alert and EPIC Reports, pursues Freedom of
    Information Act litigation, and conducts policy research on emerging
    privacy issues. For more information email info@epic.org, or write
    EPIC, 666 Pennsylvania Ave., SE, Suite 301, Washington, DC 20003.
    +1 202 544 9240 (tel), +1 202 547 5482 (fax).

    To subscribe to the EPIC Alert, send the message:

    SUBSCRIBE CPSR-ANNOUNCE Firstname Lastname

    to listserv@cpsr.org.

    (You may also find the Alert messages in the USENET newsgroup
    comp.org.cpsr.announce.)

esperanto
    Contact: esperanto-request@rand.org (Mike Urban)

    Purpose: This list is a forum for people interested in the neutral
    international language Esperanto.  Discussions about the language
    itself, the Esperanto movement, publications and news are encouraged;
    of course, discussion *in* the language itself are especially
    encouraged, although English translations may be advisable when the
    material is of interest to beginners or non-Esperantists.

Extropians

    Purpose: Extropians list is devoted to the discussion and development
    of Extropian ideas.
     Extropians may be roughly described as those simultaneously
    interested in the technological extension of human intelligence and
    perception, nanotechnology, spontaneous orders, anarchocapitalist
    politics, cryonics (and other life extension techniques), and a number
    of other related ideas. If you are an Extropian, the concept that
    these are all related topics will seem natural.

    All Extropians (and those who suspect that they are Extropians)
    are invited to join. The list is run from a commercial site and
    to strictly cover costs there is a fee charged to join the list,
    $14 per year (less for ExI member and Journal subscribers and
    students). A 30 day free-trial is given to all subscribers.

    Contact: extropians-request@extropy.org

      Extropian list is using MailWeir - the advanced mailing list
    software that allows the users to program their list-resident
    agents to pre-filter messages based on author, title and content
    and has a number of other useful and user-friendly features.

    ExI also offers a low-traffic Exi-Essay list:
        exi-essay@gnu.ai.mit.edu
        (mail to exi-essay-request@gnu.ai.mit.edu to subscribe)
    and a number of local lists announcing extropian events in different
    geographical areas.

    For more information on the Extropy Institute Inc, a non-profit
    educational foundation, send mail to exi-info@extropy.org or write to
    Extropy Institute, 13428 Maxella Avenue, #273 Marina Del Rey, CA 90292.

Fringeware
    Contact: fringeware-request@illuminati.io.com
            or: fringeware-request@io.com

    This is a moderated discussion group for people who hang out on the
    Fringes of art, society and technology, sponsored by FringeWare Inc.

    This is a very good list, its range of topics is somewhat close to
    that of the extropian list.

Frog Farm

    Purpose: The Frog Farm is devoted to the discussion of claiming,
    exercising and defending Rights in America, past, present and future.
    The main topics are issues which involve a Free People and their Public
    Servants, and how to deal with the various problems that can arise
    between a free person who exercises and demands Rights and errant public
    servants who exceed the scope of their powers.

    Membership is restricted at the discretion of the moderator. Currently,
    the list discussion is non-automated.

    To subscribe, send mail to

        frog-farm-request@blizzard.lcs.mit.edu

    The BODY of your message (NOT the Subject line) should contain
    something similar to:

     ADD joeuser@somehost.com

    or

     REMOVE joeuser@somehost.com

FSM:  (U)

     -   Free Social matrix messaging mailing list

     a "people-centric alternative for future symbolic communication"

     - discussion of intelligent communication systems, message ratings, etc.

     Join by sending a message to

        server@dark4ce.hacktic.nl

     containing a the line:

        join fsm

     Maintainer:       gerald@tacit.hacktic.nl (Gerald A. de Jong)

FutureCulture

    FutureCulture is devoted to discussion of the relevant issues and
    aspects pertaining to the future of society as we know it.

    From the roads we choose to the vehicles that will take us there,
    the FutureCulture community is dedicated to exploring the wide array
    of topics that affect our progression into the world of tommorrow.

      FutureCulture is an open, unmoderated forum for the discussion of
    topics which might be related to the future in any way. In the past
    the subject matter discussed on this list has included the following:

        + technoculture/new edge/cyberculture
        + Cyberspace & the Internet
        + virtual reality
        + the computer underground
        + cyberpunk (literary and cultural movements)
        + raves and rave culture
        + media (music/movies/books/magazines) that are relevant
        + virtual communities
        + social and public policy issues

    These are in no way a guideline or limiting range for conversation.
    FutureCulture encourages the exploration of a wide-range of subject
    matter.

    Discussion on the list often ranges from the mundane "gee-whiz", to
    deep philosophical and scientific commentary, from the latest in
    computer software and hardware, to issues of personal identity in the
    electronic world, to reviews and discussion of the latest pertinent
    fiction and non-fiction works.

    To SUBSCRIBE to FutureCulture, send a message to the listserv address:

        (listserv@uafsysb.uark.edu).

    The message body should start with:

        subscribe futurec <Your Name Here>

   To send a message to the entire list, direct it to:

                futurec@uafsysb.uark.edu

Future-Tech

    Future technology mailing list; currently dormant;

         This list is for discussing science fact and science future,
    current discoveries and hypothetical possibilities. News tidbits,
    speculation, and longer essays are all welcome. The list may appeal
    to readers of publications such as Omni, Scientific American,
    Extropy, or the Whole Earth Software Review, to name a few. 


    Possible topics may range through but not  be limited to:
      --Evolution of the Net and electronic communications
      --Information science and management
      --Artificial intelligence, neural nets, robotics
      --medicine, life extension, cybernetics, longevity
      --ecology, natural resources, energy sources
      --physical and societal evolution
      --Memetics and systems theory


    Subscription requests and Administrivia to:
       future-tech-request@cs.umb.edu

    List address:
       future-tech@cs.umb.edu

fuzzy-mail

    Purpose: Discussion of fuzzy logic, fuzzy sets. Is linked with the
    NAFIPS-L list and the comp.ai.fuzzy news-group, but all messages
    are screened by a moderator, so the noise level is low.

    To subscribe, send
    
         SUB FUZZY-MAIL Name
    
    in the body of an otherwise empty mail to

         listserver@vexpert.dbai.tuwien.ac.at

    For "Name", please specify your real name.
    Your email address will be extracted from the message header.
     
     Send all messages that you want to be sent to all subscribers to:
     
      fuzzy-mail@vexpert.dbai.tuwien.ac.at
      
GIFTEDNET-L
    listserver@birds.wm.edu

    The Center for Gifted Education at the College of William and Mary
    offers the listserv, GiftedNet, as a place to exchange information
    about gifted education. In particular, we hope the listserv will
    facilitate the dissemination of information about the science and
    language arts curriculum frameworks and units developed by the
    Center as part of the national Jacob Javits Curriculum Projects
    for High Ability Learners.  The listserv can be used by educators
    to share experiences and ideas concerning the units as well as to
    discuss general issues about gifted education.

    If you have questions about the list, please send e-mail to:

                lnboyc@mail.wm.edu  <Linda Neal Boyce>

GNN
    Global Network Navigator list
    gnn-announce@gnn.com

    Discusses Corporate Guidelines for Internet Usage, Acceptable Use
    Policies (AUPs) and other net issues.

    Moderator: Dale Dougherty     (dale@ora.com)

    GNN sets up various discussion groups on particular net topics.
    The first group discusses AUPs.
    You may join by sending email to
    
        listproc@online.ora.com

    with the following line in the body of the message:

        subscribe corp-aup YourName of YourOrganization

GS
    General Semantics list

      This list is devoted to open discussion of general semantics, the
    field of study pioneered by Alfred Korzybski, and, among others, U.S.
    Senator S.I. Hayakawa.
     
      General semantics studies how our language distorts and influences
    our thought.  As of mid-August 1994, topics have ranged from E-Prime
    (English without the verb "to be") to even more radical extensions and
    alterations of language, to the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis on linguistic
    relativity (the idea that the structure of the human being's language
    influences the manner in which he understands reality and behaves in
    respect to it), to Korzybski's theories of 'time-binding' (packaging
    and transmission of knowledge), and how GS relates to Zen Buddhism.
    All viewpoints are welcome, though deliberate disruption is discouraged. 
 
    General Semantics studies the ways in which the neurological, cultural,
    and personal representations we use constrain perception and inference.
    It develops quasi-therapeutic disciplines designed to increase our
    "consciousness of abstracting", our awareness of what we throw away each
    time we use, accept, or communicate a representation.  In doing so, it
    dramatically increases effectiveness at reasoning correctly and commu-
    nicating clearly; it also makes us far more aware of and resistant to
    semantic manipulation. 
        
    The study of general semantics sharpens our awareness that sensory
    information is only an approximation, or abstraction, of what we 
    usually call the real world.  To communicate, we use language and 
    symbols to represent results of the abstracting process, with the 
    necessary consequence that others may react to and apply their 
    collection of abstractions quite differently than we do. By constant 
    consciousness of how we use and interpret such approximations of 
    reality, we may (accepting anecdotal evidence) expect to gain better 
    control of our voluntary actions, a surprisingly satisfying and even 
    valuable achievement. 
                               
    To join the GS List, send a message to

        mcpherso@lumina.ucsd.edu

    To send mail to the other participants, send it to the address:

        gs@lumina.ucsd.edu

HotFlash

    Wired current news 
    
    More than 16,000 subscribers

    To subscribe to the HotFlash mailing list, send a message to

            info-rama@wired.com
    
    with the text
    
     subscribe hotflash
    
    in the body of the message.

ICSI-talk

     Announcements of public lectures organized by the International
     Computer Science Institute in Berkeley.

     icsi-talk-messages@ICSI.Berkeley.EDU, talk@ICSI.Berkeley.EDU
     
     Requests to be added to or deleted from the "talk" mailing
     list should be directed to talk-request@icsi.Berkeley.EDU.

INNS-L - International Neural Network Society mailing list

    This is a list for news and announcements, for members of
    the International Neural Network Society.

    If you  have any  question about  the INNS-L list, write to the list
    owners at the generic address:

        INNS-L-Request@UMDD.UMD.EDU

    Owner= Metzger@umbc (Mary Ann Metzger)

IPCT-L on LISTSERV@GUVM
       or LISTSERV@GUVM.GEORGETOWN.EDU

     The Interpersonal Computing and Technology List (IPCT-L) was created
    February 1992 by the Center for Teaching and Technology (CTT)  at the
    Academic Computer Center,  Georgetown  University.   A special effort
    will be made to promote an international forum for pedagogical issues
    important to higher education involving teaching with technology, and
    especially with connectivity and networking.

    A goal is to create a forum for the discussion of computing and other
    technology that can be used to promote learning.Topics for discussion
    may involve teaching and training; collaboration;  partnerships among
    learners, faculty or teachers,  and other interested persons  in  the
    educational community; and research that reflect these interests.
    The decade of the 1980s was characterized by the _personal_ computer,
    and development of individual productivity. The focus of the IPCT-L,
    as we move toward the 21st century,is that _interpersonal_ computing
    and technology will tie persons together throughout the world - to
    share ideas and solve problems. 

    Besides creating a forum for the topics of interest noted above,
    another interest of the CTT is to publish a scholarly, refereed
    international journal. To that end, the IPCT-L will develop a
    subscription list and act as a resource to develop the community
    necessary to review articles and recommend editorial policies as
    these publishing goals move forward.

    To subscribe send the following in an interactive command (TELL or
    SEND) or in the BODY of mail (NOT the Subject:) to LISTSERV@GUVM
    on Bitnet or LISTSERV@GUVM.GEORGETOWN.EDU on Internet:

         SUBSCRIBE IPCT-L yourfirstname yourlastname

   Example:
         SUBSCRIBE IPCT-L Mary Doe

   Owner:  Zane Berge  <BERGE@GUVAX.BITNET> or
                    <BERGE@GUVAX.GEORGETOWN.EDU>

Info-PGP
    Contact: info-pgp-request@lucpul.it.luc.edu

    Purpose: Discussion of Phil Zimmerman & Co.'s Pretty Good Privacy
    (PGP) public key encryption program for MS-DOS, Unix, SPARC, VMS,
    Atari, Amiga, and other platforms.  Mirror of alt.security.pgp and
    related articles on sci.crypt.

interest-groups
    Contact: interest-groups-request@nisc.sri.com

    Purpose: This file provides a list of various discussion lists
    available to network electronic mail users.

    The file is now available for anonymous FTP from host fs3.nisc.sri.com
    (192.33.33.53) in directory netinfo. The pathname of the file is
    netinfo/interest-groups. There is currently no electronic mail access
    to this file. 

    To keep people informed about changes to the file, there is a mailing
    list for List-of-Lists "update notices".  When any updates are made
    to the file, an announcement message will be sent to the notification
    list.  Copies of the file itself will not be sent to the list.  Site
    representatives who maintain or redistribute copies of this file for
    their own networks (e.g, DECNet, Xerox, BitNet, MailNet, etc.) and who
    cannot access the file by Internet FTP may make arrangements to have
    the file sent to them, if necessary.  File copies will normally not be
    sent to individual users.

    To get on or off the notification list, send requests to

           interest-groups-request@nisc.sri.com.
JEI-L
 
    Technology in Education Mailing List

   JEI-L  is  a  mailing  list   maintained  by  the  Joint  Education
   Initiative.  The prime purpose of  the Initiative is to promote the
   use  of  technology  in   the  K-12  classroom,  especially  CD-ROM
   scientific data sets.
                         
   This list is meant to provide  a medium through which educators and
   other  interested parties  can exchange  information, learn  of new
   developments, learn  of new  science and technology  resources, and
   exchange technical concerns.  Though the prime interest of the list
   centers around  users of  the USGS JEdI  CD-ROM set,  discussion of
   other uses of  technology in the K-12 classroom  are encouraged and
   welcomed.

   All list  subscribers will  receive an ASCII  version of  the Joint
   Education Initiative newsletter through the list.

    If you have any question about the JEI-L list,
    write to the list owners at the generic address:

        JEI-L-Request@UMDD.UMD.EDU

Kurt Goedel Society

    Purpose: The Kurt Goedel Society is setting up an electronic
    mailing list for members and people interested in the activities
    of Society.  Information about the Goedel Colloquia, Calls for
    Papers, the Collegium Logicum Lecture Series, the Newsletter, and
    information from sister societies will be distributed.  If you
    would like to be included in the mailing list, or have any
    questions, send an email to: kgs@csdec2.tuwien.ac.at
    
    Contact: kgs@csdec2.tuwien.ac.at

Leri-L (Leri-L Metaprogramming Mail Service)

     Purpose: The Leri-L list is for the bravest of net.addicts who are
    willing to give up their subscriptions to every other mailing list
    in order to keep up with the sheer volume of posts on Leri.  There
    is never a central theme  to the discussions on the list,  but one
    thing most of the subscribers have in common is an appreciation for
    psychedelic pharmaceuticals.  Best thing for you to do is to check
    out the FAQ which is in the archives,  reachable via anonymous FTP
    at bertha.pyramid.com.  Basically Leri is an electric commune, and
    is probably  one of the most interesting,  albeit laden by its own
    verbosity, mailing lists one could ever hope to be a part of.   Go
    read the FAQ.

    To subscribe, send 'subscribe leri' to majordomo@leri.net.

    In case of problems, you may try to contact  help@alpha.c2.org or
    sameer@c2.org

libernet
    Contact: libernet-request@dartmouth.edu (Barry S. Fagin)

    Purpose: Libernet is a Libertarian mailing list.  The list is
    available in two modes: as a mail reflector and as a digest.

LIBFEM
    Contact: libfem-news-request@math.uio.no (Thomas Gramstad)
             libfem-talk-request@math.uio.no (Thomas Gramstad)

    Purpose: The focus of LIBFEM is the classical liberty and individual
    rights perspective as applied to feminist issues, such as issues
    regarding ideology, politics, culture, gender, etc., in order to
    establish a network for information, discourse, cooperation,
    encouragement and consciousness raising. There has always been an
    element of individualism in the various women and feminist movements,
    although this element seems to have been somewhat neglected in recent
    movements.  LIBFEM has been divided into two groups:
LIBFEM-NEWS (low volume; news items and original postings) and
LIBFEM-TALK (news and discussion; occasional high volume). 

List-Managers
    Contact: Brent@GreatCircle.COM (Brent Chapman)

    Purpose: There was a "Mailing Lists" workshop session at the
    USENIX System Administration Conference (LISA VI) in Long Beach,
    CA, on October 22, 1992.  The participants in that workshop
    expressed a desire for a mailing list for discussions of issues
    related to managing Internet mailing lists, including (but not
    limited to) software, methods, mechanisms, techniques, and
    policies.

    I've created the list as "List-Managers@GreatCircle.COM".
    That address is a direct mail relector: all messages sent to that
    address are immediately forwarded to the list. There is a digestified
    version of the list available as
        "List-Managers-Digest@GreatCircle.COM".
      The digestified version has exactly the same messages as the direct
    version; the messages are  simply bundled into digests daily (or more
    frequently, if traffic warrants).  Both lists are unmoderated.

    To join the List-Managers mailing list, send the command

        subscribe list-managers

    in the body of a message to
    
        "Majordomo@GreatCircle.COM".
    
    If you want to subscribe something other than the account the mail is
    coming from, such as a local redistribution list, then append that
    address to the "subscribe" command; for example, to subscribe
    "local-list-managers": 

        subscribe list-managers local-list-managers@your.domain.net

    To subscribe to the digestified version, substitute "list-
    managers-digest" for "list-managers" in the examples above.

lojban
    Contact: listserv@cuvmb.cc.columbia.edu (Automated Listserver)
             lojbab@access.digex.net (Bob LeChevalier/John Cowan)

    Purpose: To use, discuss, and contribute to the development of the
    constructed human language called Lojban (known in earlier versions
    as Loglan).   Lojban has a grammar based on predicate logic,  and
    vocabulary built from the six most widely spoken human languages.
    It is intended as a tool for experimental linguistics, as a medium
    for communication with computers, and as a possible international
    auxiliary language. 

    List participants range from novice to skilled.  Up to 50% of list
    traffic is in the Lojban language.  Novice questions are welcomed.

    To be added to the list send to the listserv address above:

      subscribe lojban firstname lastname

    The listserver will add you at the address from which it thinks you
    sent the request.  If you need to be added at a different address, or
    need other manual assistance, contact the second address.  The Logical
    Language Group, Inc. asks new subscribers to send a postal mailing
    address to the second address, so that they can be added to the
    organization mailing list.

     If you  have any  question about  the LOJBAN list, write to the list
     owners at the generic address: 

         LOJBAN-Request@CUVMB.COLUMBIA.EDU

    An archive of list traffic and material about the Lojban language
    may be found at ftp.cs.yale.edu, directory pub/lojban

LONGEVITY

   This list discusses ways to extend human life.  Medical and
   Health-related issues will be discussed.  Among the proposed topics
   are: Importance of diet, vitamin supplements, new discoveries in
   science and more.

  To subscribe send the following command in the body of e-mail to
   listserv@vm3090.ege.edu.tr

   SUB LONGEVITY firstname lastname

Migra-List

    Contact: migra-list-request@lists.utah.edu
             moliva@cc.utah.edu (Maurizio Oliva)

    Purpose: Mailing list on international migration.

Mind-L
    Contact: mind-l-request@asylum.sf.ca.us (John Romkey)

    Purpose: Mind-L is a discussion group for people interested in mind
    altering techniques in general, and mind machines (light & sound,
    TENS/CES, electromagnetic pulse, floatation) & biofeedback equipment
    in particular.  Related topics include smart nutrients, hypnosis,
    relaxation techniques and subliminal tapes/videos.  Conversation
    ranges from serious research to home electronics to amateur personal
    observations.

    This group does not cover hallucinatory drugs (eg. LSD).  The subject
    may come up from time to time, but there are other lists which already
    give extensive coverage of that topic.

    To subscribe send an e-mail to <mind-l-request@asylum.sf.ca.us>
    with nothing in the subject line and only the words
    "subscribe mind-l <YourName>" in the text.

    Some back issues and other related documents and programs are stored
    on Mind-L's ftp site.  The address is asylum.sf.ca.us. Logon as
    "anonymous" and use your email address as a password.  Look in the
    directory /pub/mind-l.

MOCHIN
    - MIND, MATTER & MASHIACH: A forum for discussing ultimate reality
    and the nature and role of intelligence, especially as concerns the
    integration of higher and lower in the context of Jewish and
    metaphysical thought. While the Jewish context is formally required
    by Nysernet, we are open to insights from all traditions.

    You are cordially invited to exchange thoughts on the role of
    intelligence in world transformation. Suggested foci include:
    intuition, creativity, vision, genius, breakthrough, conscience,
    mission, obsession, destiny, desire, will, altruism, essence,
    being, consciousness, faith, certainty, science and religion,
    objectivity, immortality, etc.

    The command to subscribe is "subscribe MOCHIN your name" and
    should be sent as a message to "listserv@israel.nysernet.org"
    and not to the list address.

    MOCHIN is sponsored by the Project Mind Foundation.

    List moderator:  David S. Devor <marshlu@vms.huji.ac.il>

MUD
    Contact: jwisdom@gnu.ai.mit.edu (Joseph Wisdom)

    Purpose: If you are new in the MUD world, or are simply looking
    for new places to get into, try subscribing to Internet Games
    MUD-List today!  Make sure to include the string "mud list" in the
    subject header.

NERaves (Northeast Raves)
    Contact: listserv@umdd.umd.edu

    Purpose: One of several regional rave-related mailing lists, NE-Raves
    covers the Northeastern U.S., including Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont,
    New York, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Delaware, New Jersey,
    Pennsylvania, and West Virginia.

    If you wish to subscribe, mail listserv@umdd.umd.edu with the phrase:
    add ne-raves name@address <Firstname Lastname>
    as the only line in the message.  It will automatically reply with all
    the information you need to know to be a NE Raves CyberTribe member. :)

neuron
    Contact:neuron-request@cattell.psych.upenn.edu (Peter Marvit)

    Purpose: Neuron-Digest is a moderated list (in digest form) dealing
    with all aspects of neural networks (and any type of network or
    neuromorphic system).  Topics include both connectionist models
    (artificial neural networks) and biological systems ("wetware").
      Back issues and limited software is available via FTP from
    cattell.psych.upenn.edu.
     The Digest is gatewayed to USENET's comp.ai.neural-nets.

new.country
    Contact: oceania@world.std.com

    Purpose: Discussion of the new country Oceania.  This beautiful
    sea-city in the Caribbean will be the center of freedom on this
    planet.  It has already been featured nationwide in Details
    magazine, Boating magazine, The Elliot Wave Theorist, PC
    Techniques, and the Art Bell show.  International coverage, too
    numerous to mention, has also occurred.

newlists

    New List Announcements
        NEW-LIST@VM1.NoDak.EDU

    Contact: info@vm1.nodak.edu (Marty Hoag)

    Purpose: This is a mailing list "clearing house" for new mailing
    lists.  Subscribers will get announcements of new lists that are
    mailed to this list.

NewsCom
    Contact: starkid@ddsw1.mcs.com  (Lance Sanders)

    Purpose: To make available synergies discerned in, and created
    from, print news media (up to a 12-year time-span). Many "facts",
    particularly scientific ones, have a habit of changing with time.
    NewsCommando shows extreme prejudice toward those articles whose
    contents exhibit "legs." The depth of insight possible using the
    information mosaic method can be staggering. A form of electronic
    magazine, NewsCommando can serve as a reference tool, offer unique
    jump-off points for Medline, PaperChase, or other searches, and,
    in many ways, is the "poor-man's IdeaFisher/IdeaBank."  Vol. 1
    will contain the following articles:
       ChemTao: Synergies In the Life Sciences
       EarthWatch1: Defining the Scope of Environmental Destruction
       Why Euthanasia Must Never Be Legalized
    Use "NewsCom request" in the "Subject:" field of message headers.
    Indicate article title(s) desired or "all" in body of message.
    Articles will be deposited in your mailbox with a "NewsCom/Vol.#"
    Subject header.  Most will be in excess of 20K.  Please group-save
    them to a file for later reading.

NOVIS

    This list is for discussion of the Novis project.

    The Novis project is an effort to compile together a volume of
    techniques, knowledge, tools, exercises, disciplines, etc. about
    self-improvement.

    The name of the list comes from Robert Heinlein's short story "Gulf",
    in which he describes an organisation of superhumans, who are the next
    evolutionary step beyond current humanity, and who call themselves Homo
    Novis, as distinct from mere Homo Sapiens.  The novis list is devoted
    to self-improvement techniques, the primary focus being the development
    of abilities far beyond the average, rather than merely remedying
    deficiencies.

    This list is intended to be devoted to practical discussions of 
    techniques/exercises/tools/etc being developed and/or explored
    for the Novis project.  We are not interested in philosophical
    debates or political rants, as they have forums/lists elsewhere.

      On a more general note, the following is paraphrased from
    the OPTIManual.  The OPTIManual is Jim Meritt's compilation
    of self-improvement techniques, advice, etc. culled from 
    the previous Novis list he ran a few months back.

    This is a list for people who want more out of life.

    This list contains the thoughts and discussions of a wide variety of
    people around the world who are trying to become the best people they
    can - people who are trying to become the kind of people they want to
    be rather than the kind of people others expect them to be. People who
    set their own standards rather than just compete to be better.

    The OPTIManual is meant to be a launch pad for you to start your own
    self transformation.  Whatever your reasons for wanting to change
    yourself, the mechanisms are similar.  Specifically, the mechanisms
    we're discussing are those to get the absolute maximum performance in
    every area of your life. Basically, this book is for people who want to
    stand head and shoulders above the crowd, to be Optiman (optimal man)."

    You can find parts of the Optimanual at the Novis ftp site
    (elvis.tamu.edu)

    The list address is novis@elvis.tamu.edu.
    To subscribe, send mail to listserv@elvis.tamu.edu containing the line:

        SUB NOVIS Your Name

NSG
NSG-D
        Nanotechnology Study Group

    NSG is moderated. Its function is to publish the lecture schedule of
    the MIT Nanotechnology Study Group. Very rarely other notices dealing
    with events of exceptional interest will be posted.  Discussion of
    these lectures and any other matter involving nanotechnology should
    be directed to NSG-D. 

    To subscribe, send the message 'subscribe nsg' or subscribe nsg-d'
    to 'majordomo@world.std.com'. 

    If you want to inform the NSG list of an event of exceptional
    interest, post the news to nsg@world.std.com.

    If you wish to discuss any aspect of nanotechnology, post that
    discussion to nsg-d@world.std.com.

    If you wish to reply to a message on nsg-d, please check the header
    on your reply to make certain your mailer has understood your wishes.

Oceania
    
    Oceania is a new nation which will be sited in international waters
    in the Caribbean.  Its Constitution provides significant guarantees
    of liberty and privacy.  And the people organizing it are determined
    to live free.

    To subscribe to our mailing list, send the message
        SUBSCRIBE OCEANIA-L <YOUR E-MAIL ADDRESS> to 
        listproc@butler226a.dorm.tulane.edu.
 
        To unsubscribe, send the message
        UNSUBSCRIBE OCEANIA-L to listproc@butler226a.dorm.tulane.edu.
 
OFFSHORE
    
     OFFSHORE is an open, unmoderated discussion list intended to be a
    mutually beneficial educational forum featuring:
 
    Use of offshore structures such as asset protection trusts, foreign
    trusts, international business companies (IBC's), family protective
    trusts, limited liability companies, deferred annuities, second
    passports or citizenship, etc.  for privacy, asset protection, tax
    benefits and for personal financial security for family and loved
    ones.
 
    Discussions and comparisons of the various tax havens will be
    entertained.
 
    Book reviews on books relative to the above subject matters will be
    encouraged.
 
    Methods of achieving telecommunications privacy will be addressed
    including no record (traceless calling) as well as encryption.
 
    Newsletters and seminars pertinent to OFFSHORE will be reviewed.
 
    International frauds and financial scams will be discussed.
 
     The mailing list will kept in the strictest of confidence and not
    provided for distribution to others without your expressed written
    permisssion.
 
    To subscribe, send an E-mail message to:  arniec@hopf.dnai.com
    Subject:  Subscribe
    Message: (A brief introduction as to who you are and what you do is
       optional but appreciated.  I would like to know who is out there
       using the Internet and E-mail for OFFSHORE activities and
       transactions of this nature.
 
     Subscriptions to OFFSHORE are at the sole and exclusive
    discretion of the list owner.
 
    Owner:  Arnold L. Cornez, J.D.   arniec@hopf.dnai.com

OMEGA

    Omega is a new mailing list, intended as a forum for persons
    interested in Transhumanism and currently located in Sweden.

    For some time now, several electronic meeting places have been started
    for discussion of ideas relevant to transhumanism. Most of these are
    geographical independent. Despite the internationality and absence of
    borders of the electronic community, there are still much that concerns
    only those in the Sweden area.

    Omega was started in September 1994. Anyone is welcome to participate,
    but the mailing list is intended as a channel of information for persons
    living in Sweden.

    The number of areas relevant to transhumanism are countless, but
    science and technology are two of the most important. Some examples are
    artificial intelligence, bionics, cryonics, mega-technology, memetics, 
    nanotechnology, nootropics, omega-point,and ultimate limits of physics.
    The list of topics can never be completed, because new science and
    technology appear every day. 

    Send mail to:

        omega-admin@hu.se - subscription and info requests
        omega@hu.se - articles, information, essays, etc.

     Note: most of the list traffic is in Swedish

OSG
    Electronic Objectivism Study Group.

    The purpose of this electronic Objectivism Study Group is to provide
    a forum for exchange of information about Ayn Rand's philosophy of
    Objectivism among people who take ideas seriously.

    The following types of messages are explicitly encouraged for the
    Objectivism Study Group mailing list:

      - announcements of upcoming Objectivist events such as classes,
        lectures, and publications.
      - reports of past Objectivist events, such as a critique of a lecture
        or review of a book.
      - essays that apply or illustrate Objectivist principles.
      - attempts to validate (or invalidate) Objectivist principles with
        polite well-reasoned arguments grounded in the evidence of the
        senses.
      - questions about Objectivist principles or their application.

    To join the group, you will need to fill an application form that you
    can request from  bobs@osg.com (Bob Stubblefield)

PAGAN

    Purpose: To discuss the religions, philosophy, etc. of paganism.

    Contact: pagan-request@drycas.club.cc.cmu.edu (Stacey Greenstein)

     There is also a Western NY Pagan Happenings sub-list.
    The subscription address is

     wny-pagan-request@drycas.club.cc.cmu.edu

Paramind

        List Name:  Paramind@eskimo.com

    This is a mailing list for discussing concepts of computer-generated
    writing especially those related to the theory of the "telical
    exhaustion of the interaction of words."  Telical means, "towards an
    useful end."  The Paramind Brainstorming program, which was created
    with this theory in mind, will be discussed in detail.

    Appropriate Topics include:

        *  Speculating on the theory of "telical word-interaction
            exhaustion."
        *  Use of this theory for important research and aesthetics.
        *  How we can come up with useful and unique statements by
            computer means.
        *  Examples of uses of the Paramind program, such as merges and new
            word categories.

    NO long postings from universities, companies or individuals regarding
    AI conferences will be accepted.  No postings of subject matter not
    directly related to producing text-output by computer means.

    This list is not moderated so all messages sent to the list are
    immediately forwarded to the list.  Depending on the traffic of the
    list, it may be edited in digest form for the convenience of the
    participants.

    To join or be removed from the Paramind mailing list, send a message
    to Paramind-request@eskimo.com.

    There is also a FAQ for this list.  It is being kept at eskimo.com in
    /usr/ftp/paramind as paramind.faq and is available via anonymous FTP.

    List Coordinator:   telical@eskimo.com

       More information can be received by sending a request to the list
    coordinator. You don't have to be put on the mailing list to receive
    it, but indicate this when requesting.

PKD-list
    Contact: pkd-list-request@wang.com

    Purpose: The discussion of the works and life of Philip K. Dick
    (1928-1982), one of the world's most unusual science fiction writers.
    Topics include his books and stories, and books and stories about him
    and his life; however, discussion can (of necessity) branch out into
    the nature of reality, consciousness and religious experience.


PRJ
     The New Paradigms Project Archive and Discussion List
     ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

    Prj, is an majordomo mail list for those exploring, questioning, or
    attempting to create "paradigms" or "worldviews" in the major fields of
    human endeavor and knowledge.  A "New Paradigms Project" implies that
    humanity's current, operative, but conflicting and evolving paradigms
    are in need of change to meet the challenges of the future, but does
    not automatically rule out the restoration of "Old Paradigms" or
    "Lost Knowledge" as part of the needed "New Paradigms".

    Some of the paradigms under consideration are listed below.
    Feel free to suggest others that may merit discussion and archiving.

   **The Myths of Democracy and Pluralism vs Ruling Class/Conspiracy Theories
    ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
    Is America ruled by the outcome of the democratic process in which a
    plethora of interests have hand or is "democratic process" a myth
    by which a ruling class obtains the consent of the governed for its
    exploitive, parasitical social and economic engineering?

    If the ruling class/conspiracy paradigm is correct, is the ruling class
    unified or engaged in serious factional conflict?

    And, if the ruling class/conspiracy paradigm is correct, are America's
    ruling factions subservient to or influenced by international geopoliti- 
    cal forces such as Secret Societies, the British Oligarchy, the Vatican,
    or other religion, philosophy, race, or ethnicity based power entities.

    Do covert, competing "World Masters" or "World Imperialisms" exist?

    **Social Organism and Power Organism Theory:  Macrobes, Metazons, Gaia
      ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
     Is conspiracy theory a heurism for social and power organism theory?

    Are individual humans and groups the cells and organs of higher life
    forms? Do these higher life forms exist on a world level (Gaia) or
    on lower levels such as nations, religions, ruling classes, etc.

    **Complexity and Chaos Theory vs. Materialist Reductionism
      ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
    Do the new complexity and chaos theories overturn the materialist
    reductionist paradigm or simply elaborate on it?

    **Morphic Resonance and Formative Causation vs. Materialist Reductionism
    ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
    Do the theories of Rupert Sheldrake provide a starting point from
    which to overturn the materialist reductionist paradigm?

    **Collective Identity vs. Individualism
      ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

    **Religious Faith or Spiritual Theories vs. Science
      ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

    **Science vs. Scientism
    ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

   **Environmentalism:Reasonable Path or Strategy for Tyranny and Genocide?
   ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ 

    To subscribe to prj:

        mail to:    majordomo@mail.msen.com
        subj:       <doesn't matter>
        message:    subscribe prj

    To unsubscribe from prj:

        mail to:    majordomo@mail.msen.com
        subj:       <doesn't matter>
        message:    unsubscribe prj

    To post to prj:

        Send email to prj@mail.msen.com All mail sent to this address will
        be redistributed to all the members of the list.

PSYCHE-L

     PSYCHE (ISSN: 1039-723X) is a refereed electronic journal dedicated
    to supporting the interdisciplinary exploration of the nature of
    consciousness and its relation to the brain.  PSYCHE publishes
    material relevant to that exploration from the perspectives afforded
    by the disciplines of Cognitive Science, Philosophy, Psychology,
    Neuroscience, Artificial Intelligence and Anthropology.
    Interdisciplinary discussions are particularly encouraged.

    Subscriptions to the electronic version of PSYCHE may be initiated by
    sending the one-line message:

    SUBSCRIBE PSYCHE-L YourFirstName YourLastName

    to LISTSERV@NKI.BITNET or LISTSERV%NKI.BITNET@CUNYVM.CUNY.EDU.

PSYCHE-D
    PSYCHE-D is a moderated discussion group dedicated to supporting
    an interdisciplinary exploration of the nature of consciousness and
    its relation to the brain.  Relevant perspectives are expected to come
    from, among others, the disciplines of Cognitive Science, Philosophy,
    Psychology, Neuroscience, Artificial Intelligence and Anthropology.

    To subscribe, just send the command:

    SUBSCRIBE PSYCHE-D YourFirstName YourLastName

    to LISTSERV@NKI.BITNET or LISTSERV%NKI.BITNET@CUNYVM.CUNY.EDU.

Quanta
    Contact:  da1n@andrew.cmu.edu

    Purpose: Quanta is an electronically distributed magazine of science
    fiction. Published monthly, each issue contains short fiction,
    articles and editorials by authors around the world and across the
    net.  Quanta publishes in two formats: straight ascii and PostScript*
    for PostScript compatible printers. To subscribe to Quanta, or just to
    get more info, send mail. 

SETIQuest

        SETIQuest is a new quarterly print/electronic mail (E-mail) 
    periodical containing news, technical information, and tutorials 
    devoted to bioastronomy and its subset, SETI (Search for 
    Extraterrestrial Intelligence). 

     SETIQuest is published for professionals, serious and amateur
    astronomers, and individuals curious about this fascinating field of
    observation.  SETIQuest fills the need for a specialized astronomical 
    publication devoted exclusively to the on-going search for evidence 
    of life in the Universe.  Such evidence could be intentional or 
    inadvertent signals of other civilizations.  Such evidence could be 
    found in spectral signatures of biological activity on extrasolar
    planets or in the interstellar medium.  

        SETIQuest is written and edited for the scientifically literate 
    individual taking part in the progress of our technological 
    civilization, with articles by amateur and professional scientists.
    SETIQuest includes information about hands-on observational programs 
    that can be carried out by individuals and groups of amateur
    astronomers at radio and optical wavelengths.  

        SETIQuest is filled with articles covering topics such as:

        * Tutorials about bioastronomy and SETI
        * Microwave or optical SETI as practiced by amateurs
        * "Do-it-yourself" participation in bioastronomy and SETI activities
        * Book reviews
        * Regular commentary on issues relevant to SETI and bioastronomy:

        SETI and the political milieu

        Philosophical issues regarding the prospects of success and 
    failure in the search

        SETI as a parable of science versus pseudo science

        Publications Watch:  Summaries of recent scientific/general 
    publications relevant to SETI

        For your FREE issue of SETIQuest (Volume 1, Number 1), send us 
    your postal address to  SQINQEX@pixelacres.mv.com

SKEPTIC
    Contact: LISTSERV@JHUVM.HCF.JHU.EDU

    Purpose: SKEPTIC is a mailing list devoted to critical discussion of
    extraordinary claims.  Among the paranormal topics that are commonly
    examined are parapsychology and psychic claims, creationism, cult
    archaeology, UFO's, cryptozoology, reincarnation/survival, quackery,
    the occult and divination; but the discussion is not limited to any
    predetermined set of magical beliefs or alleged pseudosciences.

    In connection with paranormal claims, issues involving science
    and philosophy in general are often raised.  There is no policy of
    excluding any topic from consideration.  While the common point of
    view expressed is skepticism about claims that go against current
    scientific pictures, critical approaches to science itself are also
    encouraged.

    To subscribe send a mail message to
    LISTSERV@JHUVM.HCF.JHU.EDU @JHUVM with the one-line message:
       SUBSCRIBE SKEPTIC  your-full-name

SkillsBank
    Contact: sun!kass!richard  (Richard Karasik)

    Purpose: I'd like to get people together on a mailing list who are
    willing to share their skills with others - not just the computist
    ones, although that's handy to know, but some of the oddball ones
    that we all seem to have acquired.

    Ground rules: the list is not going to be publicly available but
    requests to the list for specific skills will be passed on to the
    people that have them, and they can decide about the level of
    participation they want to have.  The only public piece that will
    be mailed around is the new skills that have been added, and the
    new requests for assistance.

    I am open to any other suggestions for how to make this work.

SLRS

    Society for Long Range Studies (SLRS)

    Purpose: to support the Institute of Long Range Studies (ILRS)
     and to study the far future

    Mailing List Topic: Near Future Enclave (an informationally
    filtered, geographically isolated anticipatory democracy 
    dedicated to making quantum breakthroughs).  What Biosphere II was
    supposed to be for space exploration, NFE will be for future
    exploration.  Based on Alvin Toffler's "enclaves of the future". 

    To subscribe:

    Send e-mail to: jbowman@sunbelt.net with a line: subscribe SLRS 
    in either Subject or Body of the message.

    To discuss, Send e-mail to: jbowman@sunbelt.net Subject: NFE   or:
    Subject: <whatever futurist topic you'd like others to comment on>

SOM     - Society of Mind list

    Discussion of Marvin Minsky's Society of Mind book/theory.
    Currently this list is dormant; with some effort, we can revitalize it!

     The list address:
        minsky-admit@media.mit.edu

     requests may be sent to:
       why@media.mit.edu, bl@media.mit.edu


Sovokinform
    Contact: burkov@drfmc.ceng.cea.fr

    Purpose: CIS news, events, general information; usually in
    transliterated Russian.
    To subscribe, send message SUB SOVOKINFORM <full_name>

SPUNK

      Spunk Press is an independent publishing organization started at the
    end of 1992 by a few individuals, and run via a mailing list, which
    want to do the same thing for alternative literature as the Gutenberg
    project does to the classics. We want to archive scanned in, typed in
    or posted alternative and anarchistic material as well as distribute
    and encourage the production of such material online. Anything
    anarchistic, alternative, underground or fringe scientific will fit
    into the Spunk Press archive.

    If you want to join us in collecting material, consider joining the
    spunk-list. If you just want to get information about new titles and
    what's going on in Spunk Press, consider joining the spunk-info
    mailing list instead. To join anyone of these, please write to

      spunk-list-request@lysator.liu.se

    and specify which list you want to be added to. There is no need to
    subscribe to both lists since every piece of information sent to the
    spunk-info list will be thoroughly discussed on spunk-list first.

STC  - Stanford Theory Colloquium

    To have your name added to or removed from this mailing list, please           |
    send your request to stc-request@cs.Stanford.EDU


TAG-L  -    Talented and Gifted Education list

    Address:

        TAG-L@VM1.NoDak.EDU

    Subscribe by sending a "SUBSCRIBE TAG-L <your name>" command to
        LISTSERV@NDSUVM1.BITNET  (or  LISTSERV@VM1.NODAK.EDU).

    Coordinator:  Jolene Richardson   jrichard@sendit.nodak.edu

    Established 01/11/91

    The archives are available via anonymous FTP to VM1.NoDak.EDU
    with   CD LISTARCH and  DIR TAG-L.* to see the files.

trepan-l
trepan-d

    Weird news mailing lists.

   Maintainer: Jeremy J. B. Nguyen <jeremy@apple.com>

    Trepan-L is for the publication of weird news items.  (Note that
    this is distinguished from personal accounts of strange events.)
    Trepan-D, an associated list, is for discussion of weird news
    items, particularly those which appear on Trepan-L.  The lists are
    separate so that people who don't care about discussion can still
    receive the odd news that they do care about.

    To subscribe to either list, send mail to
    "listserv@brownvm.brown.edu" with the body containing:
        SUB <<list name>> Your Name
    To unsubscribe, make the message read:
        UNSUB <<list name>>

    (In each case, replace <<list name>> with the actual name of the
    list, Trepan-L or Trepan-D.  Don't include the brackets.

Triples

    Contact: triples-request@hal.com (Howard A. Landman)

    Purpose: To discuss non-monogamous relationships, polyfidelity,
    and group marriage, and the various issues that arise in that
    context, like jealousy, shared housing, marriage laws, sex, etc.
    Not moderated.

VEGGIE
    Contact: veggie-request@maths.bath.ac.uk

    Purpose: Any aspects of vegetarianism, vegetarian lifestyles, or
    indeed anything relevant to vegetarians.

WFS-TALK

    - This is the World Future Society mailing list for people interested
    in resources, events, and news related to futurists and futures
    studies.


    The purpose of this list is to share our collective scanning
    for books, people, conferences, other internet resources,
    programs, articles, inventions, news items, reports, and other
    things of interest to futurists.  This is also a good place to
    make requests for help with research and other projects.

    This is not designed to be a "discussion" list about futures issues. 
    There are already a number of other internet lists set up for discussion
    of various aspects of the future. Announcements and pointers to these 
    and any related NEW lists can be posted to WFS-TALK.

    The WFS-TALK list is set up as a "moderated" list which means that
    messages sent to the list are reviewed by WFSADMIN before being sent to
    the list at large.  This prevents everyone from having to deal with
    piles of error messages and and other system glitches.  It also
    provides a way to keep the list on target with our purpose and
    guidelines. The email address for the moderator is:  wfsadmin@tmn.com


    SUBSCRIBING and UNSUBSCRIBING to WFS-TALK

    To SUBSCRIBE or UNSUBSCRIBE to the WFS-TALK you must send a
    message to:    listserv@path.net        with the text:

   subscribe wfs-talk Your Name

   (or  unsubscribe wfs-talk Your Name)

    You must send the message to the listserv@path.net rather than
    to wfs-talk@path.net in order for the command to "take" since
    it is all handled automatically.

    It might be a good idea to print out a copy of this FAQ so that
    you have it handy in case you want to "unsubscribe" while
    you're on vacation and "subscribe" again when you return.

    Administration:    lisa@tmn.tmn.com (Lisa Kimball) - moderator;
                       wfsadmin@tmn.com

Wholesys-l

   This is a new mailing list for the discussion of:

   - the principles of whole systems,
   - abundance economies,
   - the creation of a new civilization,
   - new global paradigms
   - whole system metaphysics

   This might be a list for you if you would consider reading books like:

   "Operating Manual for Spaceship Earth" by Buckminster Fuller
   "Earth Ascending" by Jose Arguelles
   "Paradigms" by Joel Arthur Barker
   "The Holographic Universe" by Michael Talbot
   "Finite and Infinite Games" by James P. Carse
   "The Celestine Prophecy" by James Redfield
   "The Mind Map Book" by Tony Buzan
   "The Future of Mankind" by Tara Singh
 
   The intention is to create and discuss a positive vision for the future
   of planet Earth as a whole system.

   This is an unmoderated public list. No flaming will be allowed, but frank
   discussions are welcome. It is pre-supposed that the participants support
   the general idea of creating a better future.

   You subscribe to wholesys-l by sending a message to:

     listserv@netcom.com

   with the message text:

    subscribe wholesys-l

   All messages about subscribing, unsubscribing or any other requests must
   go to the listserv address. You can send a message with 'help' in the
   message body if you don't know what you can do.

   This list is maintained by:

   Flemming Funch <ffunch@netcom.com>

   so if you don't know what to do, send him a message.

Y-RIGHTS
    Contact: LISTSERV@SJUVM.BITNET

    Purpose: Discussion Group on the Rights of Kids and Teens.
    Broad Spectra of discussion topics, with individual liberty being
    one of the main focuses.  Open to kids, teens, young adults, adults,
    senior citizens, teachers, students, grade schools, middle schools,
    high schools, colleges and university networks, gatewaying to other
    networks.

    Digest/Notebook version available, as well as past discussions.
    E-Mail to LISTSERV@SJUVM.BITNET the following:

    SUB Y-RIGHTS firstname lastname     To subscribe to the list
    AFD Y-RIGHTS DIGEST                 Receive Weekly Digest of the list
    GET Y-RIGHTS FILELIST               List of previous discussion logs

    Listowner: kudut@hamp.hampshire.edu (Kenneth Udut)

YSN
    Contact: ysn-adm@zoyd.ee.washington.edu (John Sahr)

    Purpose: Activism on employment issues for scientists just beginning
    their careers.  The Young Scientists' Network attempts to inform the
    press, the public, and government officials that there is no shortage of
    scientists; we hope to find traditional and non-traditional employment
    for scientists.  Stories about the Young Scientists' Network have
    appeared in Science, Physics Today, and on National Public Radio;
    we've met with officials from the National Science Foundation and
    other agencies.

    ===========================================================

    ADDITIONAL USEFUL SERVICES:

- mail-to-usenet gateways

    group.name@paris.ics.uci.edu
    group.name@cs.dal.ca
    group.name@ug.cs.dal.ca

- netnews - Usenet news clipping service

    Allows you to scan the whole newsfeed for things you want,
    with a variety of options. Sends results by mail.
    I highly recommend it!

    send a message to netnews@db.stanford.edu,
    with just one word, help, in its *body*, to get info.

- sorting incoming mail

    ... may be the only way to cope with high message traffic.
    I personally used 'deliver' program on my Unix machine to sort all
    my mail into folders - one for each mailing list I am on, a private
    folder, archive of my own messages, etc. I found it extremely useful.
    (I wish it could read all this stuff for me, too ;-) )
    Now I use Eudora for the same purpose on my PC, and like it even more.

    I can help you to configure it if you are interested.

    There are also lots of other ways to do it; you can use procmail,
    mailagent, elm's filter, Pegasus,...
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

- sasha1@netcom.com  <Alexander Chislenko>

  If you have access to the Web, please look into a partial hypertext
version of this guide at http://www.lucifer.com/~sasha/lists.html
You can also find lots of interesting references in my home page:
http://www.lucifer.com/~sasha/home.html
