                 ALEXANDER CHISLENKO

        6 McLean Pl. #5  Cambridge MA 02140
        Tel. (617) 864-3382
        Email: sasha1@netcom.com
        Home page: <http://www.lucifer.com/~sasha/home.html>


JOB HISTORY:

March 1999-present

     Intelligenesis Corporation.
     1999 - Director of Mind Mining.
     2000 - Director of Recommendation Systems.
     
October 1997-February 1999

     MIT.  Researcher with the Society of Mind group at the Media Lab.
     Research of architectures and evolutionary patterns of natural and
     artificial complex systems built from multiple agents, content-aware
     media, semantic spaces, and integration of cognitive and economic
     mechanisms (Hypereconomy).

1996-1997

     Firefly Network, Inc.  Senior Software Engineer, working on the
     Automated Collaborative Filtering (ACF) software. Responsibilities
     included development of the feature-guided recommendation server
     architecture and recommendation algorithms.  Also, wrote papers
     on the perspectives of the ACF technology and its social implications.

1993-present:

      Write and occasionally lecture on perspectives of advanced
      computing and Internet development, and philosophy of
      technology in general.  Take part in development of a
      number of Websites, on a pro bono and consulting basis.

1990-1996:    Software House, Inc.  Senior Software Engineer.

      Designed and developed real-time security systems software, including
      communication programs, device drivers, CCTV control system, a
      partial Fortran-to-C converter, packages of generic mathematical
      routines for strings and abstract sets handling.
      Created a number of software productivity tools.
      Internationalized company's software. Maintained Internet tools.

1989     "Soft Union" (USSR). Freelance programmer and group leader.

      Projects included:  evolutionary and cooperative games, diet
      optimization package, language-independent spell-checker.
      Responsibilities: system design, programming, small company
      management.

1986-1989:  Soviet Academy of Sciences, Institute of Informatics.

    Developed:
      - Metadata-based system for menu-driven query generation on
        expanding database.  Design and programming. INGRES, C, Unix.
      - Model expert system for DBMS evaluation (MS-DOS, PROLOG).
      - PROLOG-tutoring  hypertext-like system with executable parts.
      - a specialized text compression program

      Lectured and wrote articles on PROLOG use, expert systems and
      database design. Managed the Institute's Computer Science program
      for gifted high school students.

1982-1986  Design Bureau for Automated Machines and Robotic Systems.

      Designed and developed:

      - network routing optimization program
      - CAD surface representation and smoothing programs using spline
        techniques and optimization algorithms
      - generic multidimensional optimization package
      - CIM short-term planning and real-time software for inventory
        control and machine tool load optimization
      - bitmap-graphics package for mechanical drawings output

EDUCATION:   1977-1982. Leningrad State University, USSR.
        M.S. in Mathematics, Computer Science, Education.

CONTINUING EDUCATION:

      Courses in computational theory, AI, cognitive science, software
    agents, contract theory, game theory, biochemistry, C++, Motif,
    economics, biology, psychology, philosophy, environmental studies,
    demographics, physics, astronomy, education, speed-reading, and
    other subjects, mainly at Leningrad University, Harvard, Tufts,
    Boston University, and MIT.

    Currently (spring 1998) taking Game Theory, Biochemistry and the
    "Society of Mind" courses at MIT.

AFFILIATIONS:

     World Future Society (board member of the Greater Boston Chapter),
     Extropy Institute (main editor of Extropy Online), Hypereconomy
     Development group (founder and group leader), Foresight Institute,
     Electronic Frontier Foundation, International Paleopsychology group.

PUBLICATIONS

     A selection of my published works is available at
     <http://www.lucifer.com/~sasha/articles/index.html>
