The latest version of this text can be found at
http://www.lucifer.com/~sasha/articles/Cyborgs.html

    The  following  is  a draft  of  my  new  essay  suggesting
parallels  between  technological enhancements  of  humans  and
current  work  on "legacy" information systems.  The  essay  is
aimed  at a [relatively] wide audience.  When I have more time,
I will turn it into a more serious work on general evolution of
functional structures, exosomatic personality architectures and
other such things.
   I would be happy to get any feedback that may help me improve
the text and develop these ideas.
   If you want to share this text with somebody,  please ask me
for the latest version.
---------------------------------------------------------------

                       ARE  YOU  A  CYBORG ?
                               
    Legacy Systems  and  Functional Cyborgization of Humans.

                             [ draft 0.85 -- 23 November 1995 ]



   The  proverbial problem of teaching an old  dog  new  tricks
recently  became  the  focus of a new  discipline  in  computer
systems  design  -- the theory of upgrading  old,  or  "legacy"
systems.  The  problems of enhancing outdated  systems  of  all
kinds have faced the evolutionary process for a long time. Many
techniques  used now for improving computer systems  have  been
employed   to  improve  various  technological  and  biological
structures, including our own bodies.  We do not have  to  wait
for  some  future society to generate "cyborgs", for  instance.
In a sense, they are already among us.

   And you might be one of them.


              LEGACY COMPUTER SYSTEMS


   Many  of  today's  computer systems,  used  in  applications
ranging from corporate accounting to air traffic control,  were
created  long  ago, and over the years were patched  and  fine-
tuned   to  perform  their  jobs.  Now  they  seem   too  slow,
unreliable  and inflexible for handling new, more  diverse  and
demanding tasks.  Unfortunately, the functions of these systems
are  very  difficult to understand, and their replacement  with
new and efficient designs seems virtually impossible.

   In  such  cases, systems architects may use new elements  to
enhance   the   old  "legacy"  systems,  using  the   following
techniques:

 Parallelism and Specialization:

   -  Dividing the increased responsibilities among a number of
old systems. The work  is substantially improved as  individual
systems  are  optimized  for performing  particular  tasks  and
relieved  from other duties. For example, a faster machine  may
sort  records,  and  the one with a working printer  may  print
them.

 Redundancy:

  Let several systems work on the same problem  and compare the
results, to make the output more reliable.


  Wrapping:

  -  Leave  the layers of the system that you cannot understand
alone,  and replace the others. For example, database  wrapping
would  leave the old database intact and replace the processing
code;   code  wrapping  would leave  the  old   decision-making
algorithms,  but  replace  the  database  engine;   application
wrapping  would  preserve  the entire  application,  but  would
replace  its  environment - e.g., emulate an  operator's  input
with a programming interface.

  External aids:

   The  novel  parts of the system can assist the old  core  in
performing its functions.
This  may  include providing the legacy system  with  necessary
resources,  pre-processing them for the input, performing  some
tasks the old system is not good at,  storing some intermediate
products, troubleshooting and repair, etc.

  Replacement of parts:

    In those cases when the structure and function of some part
of  the  system  is well understood, the part can  be  directly
replaced   with  its  improved  equivalent.  If  the  original
mechanism  is  convoluted, intertwined, and undocumented,  this
method  should  be  applied with caution, and  only  to  simple
isolatable parts of the system.
             

                  CYBORGIZATION OF HUMANS

     The  above  approaches  proved  useful  in  updating  many
computer systems.
This  experience should be taken into account  by  the  Science
Fiction    writers    and    futurists    envisioning    future
technologically enhanced humans as "cyborgs" -- creatures  that
will  have  human biological bodies as their legacy  core,  but
will  hopefully  have  many important [and complex]  biological
parts directly replaced with improved technological equivalents
(and a variety of new ones added).

   Of course, images of mechanical parts sticking in and out of
our  bodies  seem  impressive enough to be worth  putting  into
SciFi plots.

   However, the cyborgization of the humankind -- the merger of
biological  and  technological elements -- has been,  and  most
likely will be,  proceeding according to the usual scenario  of
the evolution of legacy systems.

    Parallelism  and  integration of efforts  were  implemented
before  we  became  humans -- and actually  were  an  important
prerequisite for our existence.

   As humans developed sufficient intelligence to embark on the
long  journey  of supplementing their convoluted,  undocumented
and    structurally   inflexible    biological   bodies    with
intentionally  designed extensions, they  started  with  simple
methods  and  simple   physical   parts.   At  this  stage   of
development,   wrapping  and  external  aids  were  used,  from
wrapping  the body with clothing to providing it with  external
implements serving both as extensions to biological organs  and
as parts of increasingly friendly environments -- this includes
tools, houses, transportation, heating, cooking, etc.

    Also,  at this stage new systems began to be used not  only
for supporting, but for "troubleshooting" the body (medicine) -
still without interference in the original design.

     As   things  get  more  sophisticated,  the  technological
supplementation of the biological body repeats the  same  steps
with  the  information processing. It is the  human  functional
body  that  is  now  being wrapped and augmented,  as  the  new
systems  consequently  accept important tasks  of   information
acquisition, storage, transmission and processing.


     Even  at this stage, the direct replacement  of biological
organs,  in accordance with the legacy systems theory, is  rare
and confined to simple physical parts.

     However,  there  are  ways  of  introducing  implants  and
shortcuts without violating the structural integrity of the old
kludge.   For  example, if your brain does not have  sufficient
memory  for  carrying  some operations, it  may   use  external
memory  (e.g.,  a scratch pad)  for storing intermediate  data,
and then read the results back into the brain's "wetware". This
neat  trick  allows  the  new elements  to  play  the  role  of
functional implants, representing at the same time an  internal
structural  part of your extended intelligence and an  external
part of the body.

    So while people have been playing with the images of cyborg
future  of  their  bodies,  they have  overlooked  the  ongoing
process  of  functional cyborgization they were already  taking
part in.

    In  the scenario of physical integration of biological  and
technological  structures, a cyborg can (and has been)  defined
as a physically mixed system -- an organism with a sufficiently
large infusion of technological parts.

   A functional cyborg ( should we call it a fyborg?  fuborg? )
may   be   defined   as  a  biological  organism   functionally
supplemented with technological extensions.

    If  you  do not pay attention,  the stream of technological
supplements may turn you into a functional cyborg   before  you
notice  it.   To  prevent  this, I  would  recommend  that  you
periodically submit yourself to the cyborgization check-up   by
answering the questions of the following


                        FYBORG  SELF-TEST
                              

*   Are you dependent on technology to the extent that you could
  not survive without it?

*   Would you reject a lifestyle free of any technology even if
  you could endure it?

*   Would  you  feel embarrassed and "dehumanized" if  somebody
  removed your artificial covers (clothing)  and  exposed  your
  natural biological body in public?

*    Do  you  consider  your  bank deposits  a  more  important
  personal resource storage system  than your fat deposits?

*    Do you receive most of your knowledge about the world
   through artificial symbolic language, rather than natural sensory
   experience?

*    Do  you identify yourself and judge other people  more  by
  possessions, ability to manipulate tools and positions in the
  technological  and  social  systems  than  primary biological
  features?

*    Do you spend more time thinking about -- and discussing --
  your  external  "possessions"  and  "accessories"  than  your
  internal "parts" ?


     If  you answered "yes" to most of these questions,  please
accept  my  congratulations  (and/or  condolences):   you   are
already a cyborg!

                       FATE OF CYBORGS

                               
      This  may  be  a  good point to end the  essay.  However,
whether  your  current  degree of integration  with  technology
already  qualifies you as a balanced cyborg,  or  not   --  and
especially  if  you  are  already over-qualified,  you  may  be
interested in knowing the ultimate fate of any legacy system.

    Regardless  of the intelligence of the developing  process,
there  are  only a few basic options here. Endless patching  of
aging  systems  is  not  the ultimate engineering  method.  The
evolutionary  role  of  a  legacy system  is  to  perform  some
necessary  functions and test novel design ideas while   better
systems  are being built from scratch elsewhere. After the  new
designs   become  fully  operational,  the  legacy  system   is
invariably  placed into a trashbin. Or, if it  is  particularly
good, healthy and lucky -- into a historical museum.
     Surprisingly, this last journey may not be easy to notice.
You may observe it by the following signs: you feel overwhelmed
by the complexity and fluidity of the environment and lose both
understanding and interest in what is really going on. Instead,
you  concentrate on your local old-fashioned interests and keep
playing  with  the  old  toys as if they  still  mattered.  The
advantage of a museum over a trashbin here is that  the  museum
feels  better, your needs are met  there, and ailments treated.
You   may  be  offered  simple,  convenient  and  wrong   token
"explanations"  on how this is done, yet have  no  capacity  or
desire to really understand it. You are even provided with some
entertainment  and  support for your  atavistic  and  resource-
wasting  activities,  together with assurances  that  they  are
still  quite  valuable.   In  a  trashbin,  without  all  these
luxuries,  you  feel lost, sick and useless;  new  things  look
weird  and alien, old are gone or broken; whatever remains  "of
value"  seems  rotting around you...  The only advantage  of  a
trashbin  is  that  it doesn't attempt to  disguise  itself  as
normal life, so you are at least granted a chance to understand
where you really are.   But is it worth it?

    Believe  it  or not, this is an optimistic  scenario.   The
world  moves  ahead.  It just gets too good  for *you* after  a
while.

              _______________________________________
      
     If  you  are  interested  in  my  more  general  views  on
functional evolution of the world,  I will be happy  to  e-mail
you  my essays on  Mind Age, Enhanced Reality, identity, Living
Systems and other topics.   You can also access them via my Web
home  page: http://www.lucifer.com/~sasha/home.html. Please send
your comments to sasha1@netcom.com.

                           - Alexander Chislenko
