
                   The Foresight Market and research funding.




     In the No.  10 issue of the "Foresight Update" Robin  Hanson  presented  an
interesting  proposal to create a betting market for dealing with scientific and
technological controversies, which would attract people to the  discussions  and
offer them incentives to be honest and responsible in expressing their opinions.
I think it is a good idea  and  would  like  to  contribute  some  thoughts  and
suggestions.



1  AN ANECDOTE.

     A man is accused of paying the mafia for killing  his  uncle.   He  defends
himself:   "no, I just said:  I bet $10,000 that my dear old uncle will live for
another 10 years...  - and they accepted the bet."

     This anecdote, however sad it may sound, shows that there is  a  very  fine
line, if any, between a bet and an order for action.



2  PROJECT FUNDING

     Suppose, a research group A sees that the market bets 20 to 1  against  the
feasibility  of  a project X (or the validity of a statement Y), and the trading
volume is high enough, and the group is 90% sure that it can do  (or  check)  it
for  this  money.  The group then can start betting for the project, thus buying
rights to receive market funds after the work is completed.  It is  likely  that
the  market will not react with much additional money, and with the group itself
becoming a major player, the stakes will soon reverse to 10 to 1 FOR the project
-  the  group's  honest  and  sincere estimate of its own chances to do the work
properly and in time.  Another group, B, which thinks its chances to do the work
are  60%,  and  needs  two times as high trading volume to cover its costs, will
drop its 'bid' and sell its 'bet stocks' to group A.  (In current conditions, it
well might win the bid, e.g., using its strong contacts in Washington or good PR
skills.) If, however, the group B wants to work on the project itself and thinks
that  the group A is very unlikely to fulfill it and is just trying to steal the
job - it can bet AGAINST the feasibility of the  project  while  working  on  it
itself, watch the group A fail, cash the bets, and show its own work at any time
after the deadline.



3  BIG PROJECTS

     We can expect that market orders will be picked by groups with the  highest
chances  and the lowest costs of doing the projects - by their own best and most
sincere estimates.   (Ideally.)  The  trading  volumes  would  oscillate  around
expected minimal costs of the projects.

     But there will, of course, be bets about some extremely costly, complex and
uncertain  projects  -  like  human  landing on Venus by 2030 or ever finding an
ultimate cure for cancer, and the market just won't be able to put  much  enough
                                                                          Page 2


money  into  them.   If even it did, though, any organization willing to work on
the project would have to borrow a lot of  money  both  for  the  bets  and  for
covering its operating costs - for which it would have to convince the creditors
that its estimates are trustworthy, and then they -  not  the  'betholders'!   -
would be responsible for the quality of their estimates.

     If the size of the market is not big enough - we could call it a 'curiosity
market'  as  opposed  to  the  'order-for-action market' described above - it is
still very useful, since it encourages all of the participants to improve  their
knowledge  of  the  subject and sharpen their foresight.  But even in this case,
the market may fund some practical action.  For example, a single scientist, who
feels  that the market underestimates the feasibility of some grand undertaking,
can bet for it at a current  rate  of,  e.g.,  1  to  30,  do  some  preliminary
research,  publish  its  results  to convince other market players, and sell his
bets back at the new rate of, say, 1 to 5, thus handsomely rewarding himself  for
both his work and foresight.

     Such market funding will be most efficient when the general opinion is very
skeptical  about  the  project.   And  it  is  exactly  this  early stage in the
development of a big project when it can be speeded up with minimal expenses (as
opposed to investing extra billions of dollars to gain a few months at its end),
but no conventional sources of funding are yet available.



4  CONTRIBUTIONS TO GOOD PROJECTS

     As the story with an uncle shows, individuals and organizations willing  to
facilitate  the  development  of  a  certain  project  can just place their bets
against it - and not only be sure that the work, if it is at all possible to  do
it  for  that  money, will be done by a group with low costs and high chances of
success - but will also draw additional funds from the market, and even  receive
some consolation money if the project fails.



5  DEADLINES AND JURIES

     It seems that in  many  cases  neither  a  deadline  nor  a  jury  will  be
necessary.   If the market is now more convinced than before that some statement
is true, it is by itself  an  opportunity  for  the  statement's  supporters  to
benefit from their bets, and no official verifications are needed.  To play, one
would need to foresee the shifts in the market's  opinions  and  interests,  and
place  bets  for the statements most likely to soon gain public confidence.  One
can also be allowed to withdraw all or a part of his stake at any  time  by  [an
equivalent  of]  betting against himself according to the current odds, and then
taking away the money he has put for  both  sides  -  without  affecting  anyone
else's  interests.  The presence of a jury is costly, complicates the situation,
is unnecessary when the jury agrees  with  the  market's  opinion,  and  creates
conflicts  and  public  discontent  when  it doesn't.  The checking can still be
performed voluntarily by any group of market players, and  they  will  have  all
incentives  to make sure that the timing is right, the costs are reasonable, and
the results are convincing.  - And this is exactly how other markets work -  the
role  of  regulation being to provide a framework and enforce the rules, but not
to distort the process itself by any direct involvement - unless  it  is  really
necessary.
                                                                          Page 3


     If a claim does have a deadline, we can suggest a moratorium on betting for
a  certain  [considerable]  period of time before this deadline - to prevent the
participants from wasting their far-sighted minds in  the  final  race  for  the
information on the latest details of the project.



6  LIMITATIONS OF THE MARKET

     Of course, the idea of such a market has its limitations and wouldn't  work
as  simply  and  ideally  as  described  above.   Here  is a list of some of the
difficulties I expect to arise (most of them also apply to, and are more or less
successfully   resolved  in,  all  conventional  markets),  together  with  some
reassuring remarks:

        - The market will react on every scientific and  popular  publication  -
   just  as  the  stock  prices  now  jump with news and rumors on events in the
   Persian Gulf, planned mergers and acquisitions, fashion changes, etc.,  which
   will be advantageous for short-sighted, but practical people.  (But they will
   have to seriously study the  dynamics  of  popular  scientific  beliefs  -  a
   practically  untapped  and important enough area to let them earn some money;
   besides, they will be interested in attracting the public to  scientific  and
   technological discussions).

        - The stakes and trading volumes  in  the  market  will  reflect  public
   beliefs  and  interests  rather  than  the  best available expertise and real
   social needs, and  will  not  necessarily  lead  the  research  in  the  best
   directions.   (-  Well,  nothing  is  perfect.   Still,  this  market has its
   benefits, and much useful work can be done under its control.  Meanwhile, the
   knowledge  will flow to the public, and the money will flow to the wise, both
   of which mean better foresight and decision-making in future.)

        - The players will have a temptation to pull incompetent people into the
   game  and  even  to deliberately mislead the public opinion.  (But, generally
   speaking, it must be easier to shift the public opinion in the  direction  of
   the  truth, than otherwise, and fraud would be a risky exception, rather than
   a rule.  Besides, we can expect the other side,  as  well  as  thinkers  from
   outside  the  market,  to present their own arguments, and may hope that both
   the subject and the public  will  only  be  better  off  after  an  extensive
   discussion.)

        - The process described doesn't make any group accept responsibility for
   a  project.   (But  it, just like the stocks and commodities markets, creates
   the incentives; and 'responsibility' is a word that just does  not  apply  to
   diffuse  (market)  regulation  systems.   So,  if  you want to make sure that
   something really gets done by a certain date, you better sign a contract - or
   work on it yourself - with the help of the market's funds.)

        - In many cases, market players would be interested in the projects  not
   being  done  by the set deadline - with, possibly, some chances to negatively
   influence the events.  (But there will also be opposite interests, especially
   if the problem is of any practical value - and is not that bad, after all, to
   have the supporters of useless projects lose.  I wish, though, that  'useful'
   and  'profitable'  meant  the  same  - but that's what we can expect from any
   market.)
                                                                          Page 4


        - If several groups simultaneously decide  to  do  the  job,  and  start
   betting,  the  stakes  will  rise without promising any of them a high enough
   reward to justify the development costs.  And the  work  would  stall.   (But
   after  some  time, the market will lose faith in this project and bet against
   it, thus changing the stakes to make betting for  potential  developers  more
   profitable;  besides,  some  of  the groups will quit the game and sell their
   bets to others to free cash for other purposes.  And even if  the  funds  are
   insufficient,  it  is  still  an  opportunity for a developer to receive some
   extra money - and it is certainly better to have a small help  than  to  have
   none.)

        - Commercializing this sphere of social life means  letting  Greed  make
   one  more step into the house of Wisdom.  The house may just not look as nice
   after it.  (Though the two have been increasingly dating since ancient times,
   and  seem to be fairly compatible.  And the closer they were, the faster grew
   the house.)

        - This mechanism by itself will hardly be sufficient for  education  on,
   or  funding  of,  any given subject, and will have to be carefully integrated
   with other existing methods of work and coordinational entities.

     But it is a promising idea, and in my opinion it is well worth working  on;
its  limitations  mean  that  we have not a panacea, but only a new organ in the
growing social organism - which is just what one could expect -  and  with  time
we'll learn how to use its benefits and fight its faults.



7  PRACTICAL SUGGESTIONS

     The idea seems to be interesting enough to be presented,  after  some  home
discussion,   in   a  good  popular  periodical  ("Scientific  American"?;  "The
Futurist"?), which might bring both wider  support  and  further  implementation
proposals.  I would suggest to avoid using the word 'bets', however, as giving a
somewhat illegal flavor to the project.  Without this word, people  would  still
enjoy the idea, but those in power will have less reasons to object.  After all,
aren't all other markets a kind of legalized gambling?  But they  do  not  carry
this name, are considered to be of public value (at least, in this country), and
obey the law; and so can "the Foresight Market" or whatever other  name  may  be
chosen for it.

     The market can be envisioned to play two major roles:   provide  funds  and
educate  the  public  in  new  and  non-conventional  areas  of  research.  (Old
conventional ones are already well (in the sense of:  much) organized  and  will
fiercely and successfully resist it for quite a while.) Here the market can gain
a lot from using the electronic media - electronic  bulletin  boards,  networks,
distributed  Hypertext  systems, etc., under the supervision of special interest
groups authorized according to yet inexisting laws  to  engage  in  such  market
activities.   It  can merge with other commercial activities developing in these
media, starting from membership  and  user  fees  collection,  authors'  royalty
payments  and electronic banking, and help to collect funds and organize work in
the areas little  known  to  the  general  public  and/or  ignored  by  the  R&D
establishment.
                                                                          Page 5


8  GENERAL REMARKS

     There seem to be many areas where the development  is  considerably  slowed
down  by  the  lack  of  necessary  decision-making  structures,  where we still
actually have various combinations of a few basic schemes.  Many interesting and
useful  studies  and  projects,  from  morphogenetic fields to nanotechnology to
global on-line banks of software and texts, cannot  be  implemented  by  any  of
these  schemes:   they  are too difficult for a democracy (with its increasingly
[relatively] incompetent population), too complicated for an autocracy  and  too
visionary  for  a  bureaucracy (and, unlike most of the research projects of the
relatively recent past, far too big for any single human genius, if even s/he is
free  from  most of their organizational limitations).  As a result, the streams
of social development flow from these existing structural spouts, often  leaving
unexplored  islands  in  rich  intermediate territories - just because the whole
process is blind.  If it was not, it would certainly adapt its  control  methods
to  the  requirements  of the environment, rather than just trying to spread its
tentacles still farther in the same directions.  To do this, and to  bring  some
consciousness  into  the  process of the mankind's development, we must continue
the search for new and more efficient ways of organization, utilizing the skills
of intelligent and open-minded people and the advantages of modern technology.

     The Foresight Market seems  to  be  a  good  attempt  to  advance  in  this
direction.

     It also seems to be the swan song of the market  idea,  before  the  rising
wave  of  planet-wide social integration pushes all markets into small niches of
development regulation network.  The global technostructure is (and will be - at
least  for  a  few  more  decades)  orderly  moving along the traditional system
integration paths, and the [relative!] importance of markets as systems of local
checks and balances will diminish while the whole thing starts looking more like
a single organism of high-tech Gaia, than a loose  colony  of  free  independent
entities.  However, while eagerly watching this process, we can enjoy the fruits
of the Foresight Market, which will only facilitate the transition.



9  GREAT EXPECTATIONS

     Alas, with social hierarchies turning into networked  structures,  the  old
dream  of  many great thinkers - to occupy positions on the [rapidly dissolving]
top of this very imperfect society to at least try to improve  it  -  now  looks
more  like  a  missed  opportunity.   But  still  we  can hope that some day the
processes of social self-organization will put people with  foresight  into  the
positions  [in  new  exterritorial  social  entities] they deserve.  This market
could start this process by letting them (at the  long  last!)  gain  commercial
benefits from sharing their wisdom.  But first the thinkers should have money to
bet...

     And some wishful thinking:  since the  social  and  technological  progress
tends  to  eventually  exceed  our  boldest  expectations, it seems that we, the
optimists, will tend to gain from the market activities at the  expense  of  the
pessimists  -  and  at the same time will have those gloomy skeptics fund all of
our projects!    - Well, you can recognize an optimist in this forecast.



              - Alexander Chislenko <sasha1@netcom.com> 	12/26/1991

Home page: http://www.lucifer.com/~sasha/home.html