			Drifting Identities.


   I always wondered how far I can evolve without stopping being myself...
It seems possible that the identity issue can be the ultimate limit to
growth.

   First of all, I think there is no such thing as an objective identity.
So let us consider a pair of an object (whose identity we are discussing),
and an observer/evaluator.

   Let's throw some math at it:  assume that our object is represented by
a point O evolving along a path P in a phase space S.
The Evaluator E is a function that projects S into an "identity space" I.
Usually E assigns the same value to all points of a whole big area of S -
a set of objects with "the same identity". So E[valuator] is essentially
a map on a phase space.

   Usually, at least when talking about conscious entities, we require
that the objects with the same "identity" should not only be in the same
domain, but lie on the same path.  This is a simple axiom, we can accept
it or not. It sounds somewhat artificial to me though. If one can evolve
from O1 to O2 without losing my identity, why just not agree that O1=O2
as far as identity is concerned?  Otherwise, we should consider 'virtual
identities' which we can realize by actually going there.
   
   OK, this is a foundation.  No matter how small and shaky it looks, it
can support the argument it was built for:


   Growth vs. identity dilemma.
   ----------------------------

   I don't really care what other Evaluators think about whether and
when I am going to cross an identity border on my evolutionary path.
Some of the evaluators seem to be of interest though: those that are
attached to the objects populating my current identity domain (i.e.
those into which I can possibly evolve without losing my identity as
I understand it in my current state).  I would pay special attention
to the part of this domain consisting of potentially reachable states.
    Now I want to choose my path through this thing.
    There's very little chance that I'll walk about it forever.
(It is possible though that this border lies beyond my current concept
horizon, which means that (subjectively and temporarily) I can enjoy
the feeling of "eternal identity").
    Sooner or later, though, my path will cross the border.
    We can call this point just a loss of identity, or a personal
singularity, or death.
    Do I want to go to this point? It depends of whether I like my domain.
If I do not, I might.
    Here we could also note that death in this sense does not necessarily
mean desintegration, it may well be expansion beyond recognition, which,
without much logical reason, I perceive as a more appealing choice.
In fact, though, they are not that easy to distinguish, since all my
evaluation criteria fade near that border.
   Now I move along my path to the border, and look at it.
   My perception of my identity domain can change, and the crossing point
may move.
   It the simplest case, it doesn't.  That's how most humans perceive
natural death.
   Sometimes it can move towards me (I can't think of good examples now).
   In case of expansion it looks like it will always move away, and
*subjectively* I will never cross the border.
   It raises some interesting issues though.  What if I know that if
I choose this path, I will soon come to a point D which currently looks
like the most miserable and disgusting outcome of my life, with a full
loss of identity. However, if I go and don't look too far ahead,
I'd always be happy with my state and immediate prospects, until the
very point D - and beyond.
   Should I choose the destination that I currently respect, or the path
that will be enjoyable? Not an easy choice keeping in mind that upon
coming to that nice destination I might change enough to meet it with 
disgust, and the entity that would enjoy the other path just won't be me...
   
   I would expect that all we all (not humans, extropians) will face some
tough choices here as soon as we learn how to grow.

   There is also an explanation why we don't see people "dying thru
expansion".  And this is just because we *define* our notion of identity
as something that is preserved in the transformations we are used to seeing.
When (not if) the transformations will become more drastic, this notion
will be shattered.
    In fact, if we just look at our own lives, we go thru so many
transitions that hardly preserve our identity in any reasonable
definition of this word...

			- - -

   Now I am ending the message being attracted by a personal singularity
point that I try to cross daily and that is only an example of a rich
variety of identities that constitute something that I [?] call "myself".
It's 2 a.m., time to sleep. I am discontinuing my conscious existence,
and leaving this message together with all my belongings to the tomorrow's
being who I have never seen and who will probably think that he is *me*.
Hope he'll mail it.


		- Alexander Chislenko <sasha1@netcom.com>
Home page: http://www.lucifer.com/~sasha/home.html

             Originally written  07/10/92
