[ This text was started in 1991 and last updated in January of 1993.
  After that, I gave up my attempts to convince anybody that ratings
  systems have a great promise for information technologies.
  Now I am employed in the field - and I am writing a new essay on
  its future - see  http://www.lucifer.com/~sasha/articles/ACF.html ]
----------------------------------------------------------------------


The Message Rating System Proposal.              Draft 0.43 
___________________________________              __________


 SUMMARY:

        This proposal describes the features of a message rating system
     that may be used as a smooth extension of practically any existing
     information storage / transmission system,  to provide users  with
     increased control over what they read and who reads their messages
     and  give them an opportunity to benefit from the quality of their
     postings as well as incentives to improve other users' life.
        The system is also expected to offer many other benefits, some
     of which will be described later in this text.

     The
GOAL  of this text is to share the main ideas of the message rating sys-
     tem with people who can hopefully help shape it into a practically
     implementable system specification and take part in developing it.
     The text below  does not present such a spec,  but  just describes
     various ideas  on  the subject  that  I consider  interesting  and
     appropriate for an informal introductory text.


     So I
APPEAL  to all readers to share your opinions on the contents, structure
     and language of the current text, as well as any references you may
     consider relevant.


   I understand that this text is incomplete, somewhat fragmented, omits
technical details and may not employ the best English you have ever read.
I hope to improve all of that in near future and count on your assistance.


IDEA IN BRIEF: 
--------------

   Users rate the quality of the messages they receive. These ratings are
reported to the system that collects profiles on the posters' and readers'
reputations and interests in various topics.  This information is used to
optimize the traffic  for all users according to their personal interests.
The quantity,quality and timeliness of ratings, as well as the quality of
messages  improve the users' selection of incoming messages,  thus making
sure that diligent response is in the best interest of every user.
I believe that such a system can be used as an extension of many existing
Internet services, including e-mail, news, gopher, WWW, etc.,  as well as
areas where the 'underlying interest' remains off-line, such as book and
movie ratings. 



GLOSSARY:
========

 SYSTEM  - a system of message storage and traffic employing ratings and
           agents in the mechanisms described below.

 MESSAGE - any piece of information reachable through the SYSTEM.

 RATING  - a [numeric] value assigned to a message. One message can have
           many different RATINGs assigned by different USERs.
           Also,  the AGENT gives the USER a RATING for every unread post.
           [Maybe, different words should be used to distinguish these two
           kinds of ratings]

 USER    - any entity that generates MESSAGEs and/or RATINGs in the SYSTEM.

 REPUTATION = CAPITAL = CREDITs - the system currency. Belongs to USERs.
           May be used by users to pay and receive payments for MESSAGEs
           and RATINGs generated by others and themselves.

 AGENT   - USER's personal part of the SYSTEM. Configured by the USER to
           control MESSAGE and CAPITAL traffic to and from the USER.


 SYSTEM MANAGER / OWNER - a person or group that runs the SYSTEM, manages
           hardware and software, sets the rules, resolves disputes, etc.


        HOW IT WORKS.
        -------------

 Writing messages:

    When you write a message, you *may* pay any number of credits for it,
thus indicating how much importance you assign to it.
You may not want to pay for it if you don't have enough reputation/capital
or think this message  is not that important,  or just don't feel like it,
but  *I* may instruct my agent to discard all messages rated low by their
own authors.  Also if you have a huge reputation  on the system,  you may
hope that all smart people instructed their agents to read all your stuff
regardless of the number of credits you put on it.
You may also set a minimal price you want to get from each reader for this
message. 

Reading and rating messages:

   When you read a message, you may rate it by paying an arbitrary number
of credits for it. These credits will go to the author of the message and
to those users whose ratings were most helpful in selecting it. Again,you
don't have to rate anything (rate it with 0), but in this case the system
will not learn your interests,and you will not be able to use the benefits
of the rating-based selection, neither you will be paid for your ratings.
    Also, a message may have a minimal amount of credits its author wants
you to pay for reading it.  The payment  should be made  automatically by
your agent before you receive the message.You may instruct your agents to
send you only free messages (except from certain people, topics, etc.) If
you think that the required payments unfairly restrict your access to some
messages, consider the rights of their authors not to share their thoughts
with those who [consistently] rate them as worthless or are not knowledge-
able enough in the topic to have deserved any reputation. 
    You don't have a right to read my message if I don't want you to do it!
Though the authors may choose to [instruct their agents to] share their
messages for free with all or some other users - e.g., new to the system.

Getting messages rated:

 The messages get rated *for you* by your agent (this rating is different
from the rating you assign  to a message after reading it).   An agent is
basically a custom - configured program that takes into account the repu-
tation of the author of the message, other users' ratings and a number of
other things. When using other users' ratings, an agent takes into account
correlation of their ratings with yours on a given group of messages.
A group of messages may consist of all messages specified by their topic,
author,  title,  keywords or whatever else you may instruct your agent to
keep track of. The suggested default would be a topic (e.g. as defined by
prefix on extropian list).

  Selecting messages.

  Your typical instruction to your agent can be:
"get me all messages you rate over 8.5, all free ones you rate over 6.0,
all on topic T, all by USER X rated over 0, and if total is fewer
than 20 messages, add the best-rated up to 20.  Also give me all unrated
messages on my professional topic P  (I'll have a chance to earn credits
rating them, so put them on top please! -all other message sort by their
ratings in descended order). And yes, never pay more than 10 credits for
a message without my approval."   - this shouldn't be difficult to do by
providing a configuration info to a standard system agent.
  A list of messages that received insufficient rating will be sent to
the user periodically; it will contain message #, subject and rating.
These messages may then be sent on user's request.

 [more on] Paying for ratings:

   You rate a message by paying for it.   The payment goes partly to the
author of the message, and partly to the raters who helped you choose it.
(The discussion of how to divide the payments between the authors and the
raters is beyond the scope of this text).   Raters divide their share of
credits depending on the correlation of their ratings for this message
with yours,  and how *early*  they rated it  (but not their reputations -
fair game!).You may instruct your agent to ignore ratings made by certain
users specified by name, minimal reputation or other criteria. Making the
payment dependent on who rated the message first  makes sure  nobody will
get a piece of the pie by just repeating somebody else's ratings,and also
gives incentives  to users  to read messages early  and keep  looking for
pearls that may have passed unnoticed. 


Your relation with your agent. 

   You have write access to some parts of your agent[s data], e.g. rules
for reading  other users'   messages  and distributing yours,  read-only
access to other parts  (e.g. your reputation[s]),  and no access to some
other parts (e.g., I want you to allow your agent use my ratings,  but I
don't what *you* to know what they are.  Thus, your agent respects other
users' privacy and,  to a certain extent,  private copyright laws.  Also,
the agent may  keep track of which messages you read  and how  you rated
them, calculates correlation of your ratings with those of other users',
etc.  You may  share all or parts  of your agent with other users on any
conditions. You may choose to make different parts of your agent, inclu-
ding your name, reputation[s] and rating rules visible to other users on
any conditions you may want to impose. You may also have multiple agents. 


    Multiple reputations.

    It is logical to keep different reputations for one user on every
message topic (or otherwise defined message cluster). Your political
opinions might have earned you a great reputation, but it doesn't mean
your ideas on nanotechnology have as much value.  However, you may be
allowed to exchange your reputation credits earned in one area into
credits earned by you - or *anybody else* - in another area, using the
current 'market' exchange rate. We could expect that credits earned in
related areas will be more or less easily transferable.  The system
manager may tax such transactions to discourage loss of reputations'
relevance (though there are strong reasons not to do that).



   More on capital control.


   The system provides the financial control of its transactions, which
may include: 

     - initial reputation 'capital' distribution. A certain sum can be
       given or lent to every new user.
 
     - additional emissions of currency;

     - control over capital transfer / exchange operations;
  
     - fiscal policy:  certain operations,  like exchanges, may be taxed;
       also,  one may tax users'  reputations to make sure  they reflect
       users' current positions. Dormant users' reputations may be taxed
       at a higher rate.  Active posters/raters update their reputations
       frequently enough to keep them current and may be made tax-exempt.
        - the taxation issues easily come to mind, but it seems that all
       their goals may be easier and more efficiently achieved without
       them.

     - trading the credits for 'real' money.The money earned can be spent
       to pay for the system hardware and software development.  Also, an
       exchange may allow good posters / raters  to earn their living for
       the work they do. The negative effects of the rich but incompetent
       users on the quality of other user's reading will be minimal,since
       their low-rated messages will be discarded by the smart agents.


Other financial opportunities:

   Certain standard payments (e.g., for writing a message) may get distri-
buted to other users  proportionally  to their capital.  This  (though in
contradiction with the idea  of taxation aimed at preserving reputations'
relevance)  would give users  incentives to work hard at the beginning of
the system's existence,  to post  their best articles or compile FAQs  as
early as possible, etc.,  and also will make everybody interested  in the
expansion of the system.   Also, this policy makes  financial investments
attractive- if you think the list is going to be popular, buy the credits
in advance! They will pay for the current system development-and you will
return the investment later, even if you don't have any personal interest
in the discussion.



 Other benefits of the system:
  (some of these have already been achieved by the DF agent).

 - Users will have good feedback from the readers;

 -     Nobody will have to be 'officially' excluded from the system  for
   sending stupid, irrelevant or impolite messages.  Their messages will
   just become invisible  to everybody who  does not like them.  Thus we
   replace  authoritarianism and coercion  with  ANARCHY and SPONTANEOUS
   ORDER. (still, some cases, like credit fraud, breach of privacy, etc.,
   may require interference of the system manager).

 - The rating system will drastically reduce message traffic.
   In the current systems,after you choose the presentation of information
   (e.g. plain texts, or color GIFs),  and start spending all the time you
   have for reading your mail, all further increase in traffic consists of
   the messages YOU DO NOT WANT TO READ,  and the signal/noise ratio tends
   to 0 together with your satisfaction. The rating system would allow you
   to keep this ratio very high - and improving.

 - You don't have to read and rate hundreds of messages to make your agent
   barely usable. Just get (buy/rent/borrow) a few agent parts from people
   whose  interests  and opinions  you have reasons  to respect,  put them
   together - and start having fun! Later, you will get to know the system
   better,and learn how to earn more credits and cheaply get messages that
   would bring you  maximal  satisfaction  for the time and effort you are
   ready to put into it. 

 - There is no limit to the number of users or postings in the system.
   System growth may only translate into better selection of everyone's
   reading, not more noise.


 - The system may help people with similar interests find each other;
   the users then can query the publicly accessible parts of others'
   profiles and attempt to contact each other in order to form a new
   discussion group, local baseball team, business or family.
 
 Who will benefit most from such a system?

 First, who won't:
     Established scientific and other professional disciplines are already
sufficiently supported by established media; business is interested more in
keeping the information  to itself  rather than spreading it;  government's
reports will never compete with each other  on the market,  casual chats or
alt.sex.lets.do.it.now ads hardly require a sophisticated system for rating
the conceptual depth of the postings... 

    Now, we are left with non-formalized,  volatile communities that would
like to increase the quality of their  information exchanges and are ready
to share their opinions  with anybody  who may be interested in them,  and
for whom the relevance and quality of the information and expertise of the
authors are highly important. 

    Looks like most,  if not all,  people and groups I like fall into this
category. 


 Who can put such a system together?

  
   People who have:

   - interest in using such a system (see above);
   - current access to the Internet;
   - experience in writing software;
   - respect to free market communities;
   - some idea  of digital cash;
   - understanding of copyright and privacy issues;
   - sufficient vision in information technology development;
   - a good share of adventurism.

If you are aware of any group of such people, please let me know!   ;-)


  Some general thoughts on messaging systems.
  -------------------------------------------

    Currently available messaging systems, consisting of segmented flow of
messages and a non-rating reader, have a natural limit (lets consider only
discussion streams,  as opposed to, say, .forsale kinds)  in segment size,
after which the segments become  unbearably cumbersome  and have to either
kick off and/or suppress their own participants or break up to survive.
This process has already destroyed many virtual communities.
The solution, in my opinion, lies in both better categorizing of informa-
tion (this has a great variety of well developed methods) and assessing
_quality_ of individual items (the task, of which AI will not be capable
for at least another [human] generation).

         --------------------------------------------------------
    Another bad consequence of this situation is that the topic cyberspace
becomes  increasingly  fragmented  which  puts  smaller and  smaller  meme
populations  into reproductive isolation and  inhibits cross-fertilization
of ideas.
    Thus,  while the Net  does  a great job  in carrying  information over
*geographic* boundaries,  it falls far behind  any  old-fashioned off-line
conversation in its ability to cross borders in concept space. 
    So, the rating system  will not only drastically increase  the quality
and diversity of your reading, protect your interests, reward your efforts
and save system bandwidth.
    It is a revolutionary engine that may transform the current cyberspace
feudalism into a market economy  and bring  the fracturing  global body of
knowledge into shape. 
    I could hardly think of any project of greater importance.
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------


Implementation plan: modest -> daring -> SciFi
-----------------------------------------------

Stage I
~1993)      Start with one mailing list. We may base an incoming message's
        rating on the reputation of its author  on this topic.  Individual
        message ratings would require  delaying of messages,  or a request
        from each user on logon to send the ratings for the posts s/he has
        received;  then a modified reader  can sort the messages according
        to their ratings. Also, ratings update can be sent periodically to
        all participants (or appended to every message they receive).
         Even using an unmodified reader, and receiving *all* the messages
        (say, 500), the users will get the list of those few that are best
        for their interests, read it, and take actions manually.
             Such a variant may be practically implemented with relatively
        little work, and may bring limited, but immediate benefits to most
        of the list members.

Stage II
~1997)      Global information service with more or less fully implemented
        encryption  and  archiving  features,  elements  of hypertext  and
        digital 'reputation' cash.  Smart people get rich,  curious people
        learn.  Fools stay off-line.

Stage III
~2029).    Brain-resident terabit modem with VR interface suggests you the
        best of global multisensia according to your current interests.
        Which means the ultimate freedom of choice. Plus global integration
        of consciousness.  Both of which help people prepare for the Singu-
        larity which immediately follows,unnoticeable for non-participants.




 Alexander Chislenko.
 sasha1@netco