
    NETWORKING IN THE MIND AGE     [Draft 0.80]
(Some thoughts on evolution of robotics and distributed systems )

(C)   Alexander Chislenko,  1996.
___________________________________________________________


ABSTRACT

   The advent of the Mind Age of intelligent robots envisioned by Hans
Moravec will bring profound transformations in global social and
technological structures and relations of an advanced intelligence to its
environment. The ability of future machines to directly share experiences
and knowledge with each other will lead to evolution of intelligence from
relatively isolated individual minds to highly interconnected structural
entities. The development of a network of communicating mobile and
stationary devices may be seen as a natural continuation of biological and
technological processes leading to a community of intentionally designed
and globally interconnected structures. The growing reliance of system
connections on functional, rather than physical, proximity of their
elements will dramatically transform the notions of personhood and identity
and create a new community of distributed "infomorphs" -- advanced
informational entities -- that will bring the ongoing process of liberation
of functional structures from material dependence to its logical
conclusions. The infomorph society will be built on new organizational
principles and will represent a blend of a superliquid economy, cyberspace
anarchy and advanced consciousness. The new system will incorporate many of
today's structures and will develop new traits transcending the limits of
human understanding. Its evolution will evade human control, but relations
of descendants of humans and today's machines will be largely symbiotic and
will lead to the emergence of a new ecology of intelligence.

                      MORAVEC'S  VISIONS

   In his upcoming book, "Mind Age: Transcendence Through Robots", Hans
Moravec describes further stages in the evolution of the robotics industry,
where each robot will learn from experience, adapt to changing environments
and eventually acquire real intelligence approaching- and then exceeding -
that of humans. The intelligent machines are expected to replace humans in
most tasks we are capable of. This will raise a plethora of issues, from
human unemployment to ethical treatment of robots and the task of taming
their runaway intelligence.

   "Mind Age" is a provocative and compelling book that I recommend to
anyone interested in the structural evolution of the world. In this essay,
I will build from Moravec's conclusions and suggest some complementary
ideas, mostly related to the distributed architecture of future
intelligence that I consider important for exploring the Mind Age.

                 KNOWLEDGE SHARING

  Learning from the experience is a crucially important skill that is going
to revolutionize the way machines work. If a robot slips on a banana peel a
number of times, it will be less likely to do it again in the future.
However, processing of limited personal experience by limited intelligence
is bound to bring limited results. The derived knowledge may be incomplete,
inconsistent, and clumsily formulated, which will lead to false
conclusions, arbitrary beliefs and superstitions - the typical content of
any primitive mind.

   Robots who already had that educational banana peel experience could
share it, together with some conclusions, with your robot. Or - better yet,
they could share information with the corresponding knowledge processor,
which would combine one robot's experience with that of others, develop
efficient general algorithms for identifying similar situations and taking
appropriate actions, and then download them to all participating robots.

  Humans obtain most of their knowledge by learning from experience and
from the conclusions of others, despite their poor memory, low
communication speeds and inability to transfer knowledge directly.  One may
expect information sharing among robots, who are not handicapped by any of
these limitations, to be much more efficient. Furthermore, information
storage and processing costs in large stationary machines may be much lower
than in small, mobile units. Elimination of redundant computations within
millions of robots would make a networked system greatly more efficient
than a collection of unconnected machines. Sharing of experience may prove
to be a still greater benefit. Thus, cooperative knowledge processing would
be several orders of magnitude less expensive and at the same time vastly
more productive. Such advantages make the networked design an imperative
rather than a matter of taste.

                  PUTTING NETWORKED ROBOTS TO WORK

   Rather than functioning as independent entities, networked robots and
other smart machines would work more like semi-intelligent, semi-autonomous
front-ends of the global system. Your home, for example, will have a number
of devices with varying types and degrees of mobility, sensitivity and
intelligence  - and so will cars, factories, highways, spaceships, etc.
These devices will interact with larger machines and each other for
continuous data backups, experience sharing, and knowledge upgrading.

  Each networked machine would ultimately rely on global intelligence, and
would only locally store the knowledge that is frequently used or may be
urgently needed. For example, if somebody starts telling your robot a joke
in ancient Greek, it will forward the sound stream to the nearest
linguistics expert and receive the meaning of the message, a suggested
witty reply, a Greek speech parser and a briefing on Greece before it
finishes the polite chuckle recommended by its own processor as an easy way
to buy time.

   Actually, it may not even be necessary to receive the full parser and
knowledge base, as the "remote thinking" service could provide a more
efficient alternative - unless those ancient Greeks are about to
permanently disconnect your robot from the Net.

  Dependence on external sources of knowledge will hardly be a serious
limitation since robots, just as all other open (dissipative) systems, will
critically depend on connections to many other resources, from information
about the environment to energy and materials. The actual balance of
intelligence between a local client and the rest of the system will depend
on various technical factors and may range from fully autonomous machines
working in remote or dangerous locations, to a completely "dumb" front end,
such as a sensor or an actuator connected to the network. A mobile machine
could exchange information continuously via a slow wireless link to obtain
urgent communications, news updates, and small software enhancements, and
periodically plug into the high-bandwidth network for larger information
transfers.

              STRUCTURE OF GLOBAL INTELLIGENCE

   The architecture of the global intelligent network will undoubtedly be
quite complex. Various parts of each robot's intelligence will be shared
with multiple archiving and knowledge-providing host computers based on a
variety of economic, privacy, and security considerations. In general, new
knowledge may be bought or rented by robots or their owners, as automated
production and distribution of information becomes the primary area of
economic activity. One may also get beta-test knowledge for free or agree
to run experimental programs for pay; people can also get paid for putting
their machines into conditions where they could generate valuable new
experiences. Participants may also want to specify what information can be
shared with other parts of the system, what can be used only for
generalization, and what should not be shared at all, but just archived in
an encrypted form.

   Most of the main networking components of such a system have already
been designed or at least conceived.  Today's communication protocols,
mirrored file servers, public key cryptography, collaborative information
filtering schemes, message authentication algorithms, computational
economies, computerized banking and other network constructs will evolve
into essential parts of future global intelligence.

  This system will not be a gigantic superorganism, despite the implied
high degree of structural integration. The global "mind" will be
compartmentalized, with many relatively independent components and threads,
separated from each other by subject boundaries, as well as property,
privacy, and security-related interests.  Knowledge servers may have
different world models, incompatible knowledge representations or
conflicting opinions. While complicating knowledge development, functional
compartmentalization will also increase the overall stability and
versatility of the system, as it will help contain the structural faults
within the subsystems that produced them and ensure safety of information
domains from hostile corruption.

GLOBAL MIND, OR... ?

   Painful historical experiences made centralization a scare word in
discussions of integrated projects.  But in this case, it doesn't seem to
be a danger: physical centralization is unlikely, since both safety of
storage and traffic efficiency require the existence of multiple remote
archives and knowledge servers; centralization in the sense of information
processing is impossible, because the very concept of a center is not
applicable to a massively parallel, globally distributed and extremely
complex system.

  The notion of a single "self" in its traditional sense would not apply to
this system, or any single robot - though perhaps it can be applied to some
functional subsystems. The intelligent personalities of tomorrow will
evolve from today's philosophical systems, technological disciplines and
software complexes. Current human cultures may not leave functional heirs
as they are based too heavily on the peculiarities of human nature.
Physically connected consciousness carriers will be left behind the
evolutionary frontier. New distributed systems will take the evolutionary
lead, and physical objects will adapt to more closely follow functional
entities. (This process is already well under way, in such forms as
cultural and economic specialization.) The resulting system is likely to
represent a mix of a superliquid economy, cyberspace anarchy, and
consciousness architecture described by Marvin Minsky in "The Society of
Mind". I doubt that it can be described by any single integrated theory.

   One can argue that many distributed systems already possess some
reflective consciousness. A computer network may locally store more
information about its global condition than a human consciousness has about
its underlying layers (at least, in relative terms). Philosophy spends a
greater share of its effort studying its own nature and purpose than most
humans I know. The recent surge in meta-disciplines and methodological and
futurological studies is a clear indicator that the global body of
knowledge is becoming increasingly self-conscious.

  It may be difficult to get used to dealing with a volatile distributed
entity.  Suppose your robot made some really stupid mistake.  You are mad
at it. The robot explains that the action was caused by a temporary
condition in the experimental semantic subnetwork and suggests to present
to you a hundred-terabyte volume of incremental archives, memory snapshots
and audit trails from numerous servers involved in the making of the
unfortunate decision, containing a partial description of the state of the
relevant parts of the system at the time.  If you can even find the
culprit, it's non-material, distributed, and long gone.

   Now, what do you kick ?

              EVOLUTION OF DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS

   There is nothing really new in the idea of distributed functionality,
just as networking isn't only a recent trend in the computer industry.
Throughout all of the evolutionary process, more and more structural
elements become exosomatic (non-biological), distributed and shared.
Thousands of years ago, people started storing more energy, materials and
tools outside their bodies than within them. This process is accompanied by
a widening personal perception of self, from identifying with ever  larger
communities and even abstract statements to assigning an increasing value
to exosomatic personal parts (most of us value our bank deposits higher
than our fat deposits for personal resource storage).

   Functional extensions to our once purely biological bodies evolve from
passive non- biological material additions (such as clothes) to information
transmitting shareable parts (e.g., thermometers as shared sensors) to
active distributed extensions (medicine as external shared immune system).
The progress here is characterized by growing integration and liquidity of
the system, as well as liberation of its functional elements from the
constraints of their material substrates.

   Additionally, distributed systems are much less susceptible to
accidental or deliberate physical damage than localized physical
structures. This makes them the only class of entities that can hope to
achieve true immortality. In fact, they are the only ones to deserve it,
too. One may notice that all sufficiently complex entities with unlimited
natural life spans - from ant colonies to large ecologies and cultures -
are distributed.  Physically connected objects, including biological
organisms, are no longer independently alive and even contain, in the
interests of larger systems, self-destruction mechanisms that lie beyond
their control. Some of these objects are silly enough to believe that the
whole historical process is happening solely for their own benefit, but
that's another issue...

   It may seem strange that even the AI visionaries still think in terms of
non-distributed systems.  I would explain this by the human "automorphic"
tendency to identify the notion of a functional entity with a physically
connected object, along with the fact that both early animals and machines
have tended to be relatively autonomous beings.

   It is understandable why early biological systems were non-distributed:
young Nature couldn't develop information coding and transfer standards at
the initial stages of growth. At that time, the organisms were separate
from each other and did not learn much during their lifetime. By the time
they started accumulating any features worth sharing, it was too late to
change the design. Ever since then, Nature's attempts to reach functional
integration on a meta-organism level suffered from the fact that most of
the individual features -inherited or acquired- either are completely
nontransferable or take an excruciating amount of circumnavigational effort
to share.

  Those important advances that did take place in this area, such as
development of genetic code, sexual reproduction and language, were still
very far from direct sharing of internal features with all interested
parties. Real breakthroughs in this direction start with the advent of
economics and computer communications. Unfortunately, biological organisms
can benefit from them only indirectly.

   Life most always starts as a set of non-distributed objects, since
permanent physical connection, albeit overly restrictive, provides a
natural and easy way to exchange information and material resources within
a functional body. Later, as more efficient and subtle system designs
appear, the evolutionary frontier gradually shifts towards distributed
systems.  One may expect all sufficiently advanced extraterrestrial
intelligences to be distributed; the situation on Earth now may be
approaching a climax in this process.

   If we extrapolate the current trends in increasing complexity and
integration of the system, as well as its growing spatial spread and
control over the material world,  to their logical conclusions, we can
ultimately envision a superintelligent entity permeating the entire
universe, with integration on the quantum scale and many spectacular
emergent features. This picture bears a striking resemblance to the
familiar concept of an omnipresent, omniscient and omnipotent entity.
Spiritually inclined rationalists may view the ongoing evolutionary process
as one of "theogenesis". An interesting question is whether it has already
happened elsewhere.

  Our current efforts are laying the foundation for the infrastructure of
the coming universal "intelligence". Many of our achievements in
information engineering may persist forever and eventually become parts of
the internal architecture of "God". (Quite likely, as sentimentally
preserved rudiments ;-) ).

      LIFE AS A DISTRIBUTED INFO-BEING.

   The lives of distributed beings (let's call them "infomorphs" after
Charles Platt) who have no permanent bodies but possess near-perfect
information-handling abilities, will be dramatically different from ours.

   For one thing, they certainly won't have to undergo long periods of
education. If one infomorph wants to learn something from another, it can
just copy the necessary information or access the teacher's knowledge as
its own. If infomorphs have a concept of "fun", it certainly won't be
rollercoaster rides. Arts, business, and child-bearing may merge into
production of arbitrary functional entities for both pleasure and profit,
provided one can gather enough resources to create and support them.

   Will the traditional human issues be of any relevance in the world of
distributed entities?  How about the abortion debate?  Retirement?  Family
values?  Partying? Ethics? ("All functional entities are created equal"?)
Will human-style democracy (decision-making by body count) work in the
world of ever changing functional interconnections, where the very
definition of what constitutes a person will be increasingly blurred?   Or
will it be replaced by an anarchy with ad-hoc contracts? Could an infomorph
court of law issue a memory search warrant? Could an individual's memory be
kept encrypted? Will infomorphs be entitled to "medical" insurance against
certain types of structural damage, or will they just have to back
themselves up regularly?

   Human concepts of personhood and identity are rooted in perceptions of
physical objects and their appearances, as well as random details of human
body composition and reproduction techniques.  Relocating one's body and
one's material possessions lies at the foundation of both human labor and
human thought. Many other concepts are based on human functional
imperfections - one could hardly put the idea of a "soul" into the "head"
of a being that knows and consciously controls every bit of itself and its
creations. With people, who don't see what is going on in their own brains,
this is much easier.

  Advanced info-entities will consider most human notions irrelevant, and
rightfully so. But can you find anything of common interest for
communicating with them? - Perhaps, if your concepts are sufficiently
abstracted from your bodily functions and your physical and cultural
environment to make objective sense. (Remember that all those people with
whom you seem to have absolutely nothing in common and have trouble
socializing with, share the fundamental experiences with you; intelligent
aliens won't!)

   If even your thoughts are there, the language you use to express them is
not.   It is still all appearances and locations. Most prepositions in our
language, for example, refer to physical space - words like "below",
"over", "across", etc. They may be useful for gluing references to physical
objects into one sentence, but are hardly optimal for expressing functional
relations.

   Infomorph languages will not necessarily have visual or audio
representations and probably will not allow them, since advanced
intelligences may exchange interconnected semantic constructs of arbitrary
complexity that would have no adequate expression in small linear (sound)
or flat (picture) images. We can get an appreciation of this problem by
trying to discuss philosophy in baby-talk.

   With advanced technology and sufficient interest in infomorph world, you
would still have to modify your mental structures beyond recognition to
understand it.  In other words, you may not be able to enter that paradise
of transcendent wisdom alive...

             TRANSCENDENT ECONOMY

  Let us try to picture the structure of what transhumanist philosophers
would call the Post-Singularity  economy.

  Spatial expansion of the civilization has been historically lagging
behind its growth in value and complexity. With this trend continuing into
the future, the basic physical real estate -- space, time, matter and
energy -- will command ever higher premiums (but still falling in
proportion to intelligence) -- unless methods of creating additional
resources are discovered. Improved communications will ensure more
homogeneous geographical distribution of "real estate" values. Advanced
engineering techniques will bring the cost of implementing most structures
below the value of the needed raw materials, so physical artifacts will
lose their value relative to that of substrates and implementation
algorithms - to the extent that most physical structures will exist only
when they are necessary, and will be kept in a compact "recipe" form when
idle, to give currently needed constructs a chance to embody themselves
(that's how we recycle computer memory, floor space and glass bottles
already). However, many objects that are frequently needed may be kept in
the physical form for a while, as repeated re-assembly may consume too much
energy.  The time of their usage will be shared among all interested
entities through market mechanisms - until they have to be disembodied due
to low demand. However, this doesn't mean fierce competition of infomorphs
for the right to embody themselves, as they will have no natural physical
appearance. Rather, they will use the physical world as a shared tool kit.

  The value of stored pieces of information will also be constantly re-
evaluated by its owners. Today we ruthlessly erase programs that were so
precious just a few years ago, to free space for newer versions; tomorrow,
superintelligent entities could be wiped out as useless junk minutes after
their birth.

   Many conventional economic notions of 3-D space, such as primary
locations and differential rent, will become irrelevant under new effective
topologies of the social space.  Remaining economic parameters may
dramatically change.        For example, the increased value of time and
rapid pace of growth may result in interest rates going up by orders of
magnitude.

   Transportation, which in modern societies makes up about 40% of all
economic costs, will  diminish in importance, at least as far as dragging
physical objects from one place to another is concerned. However, its
functional successor - transfer of knowledge from one representation system
or subject domain to another - may play at least as large a role.

  We can also expect that an advanced community of intelligent agents will
employ new mechanisms for generalization and sharing of economic
experience.  Along with traditional economic signaling instruments that
represent aggregate value assessments of goods and services, new
communicative instruments may transport semantic descriptions of objects,
reputations of producers, non-scalar indicators of situational utilities of
various resources, self-enforceable contractual obligations, and complex
derivatives of such indicators.

  Many traditional tendencies of system evolution will still hold;
structures with higher survival abilities will persist; structures with
higher growth abilities will spread, thus shaping the world. However,
since nothing stable will be likely to persist (let alone spread) for long
in the rapidly evolving environment, the main "survival" recipe will be
aggressive self-modification, always eventually resulting in the loss of
identity of the original object -- a death forward, so to speak. This trend
is a radical departure from the conservative survival  strategies of
traditional human cultures, developed in almost- stagnant environments. Its
development will render the concept of [even] functional identity obsolete;
the remnants of its meaning will migrate to methodological threads and
directions of development. We may already notice the advent of "thread
identity" by the growing importance of goals and self-transformation in our
lives, compared to the "state- oriented" self-perception of our recent
predecessors, and increasing interest in futurology (which takes the
epistemological role of historical studies in transient times).

   Existing economic theories may find it difficult to assess the condition
of a transcendent system. Today's economic indicators do a decent job in
reflecting quantitative changes in the structurally  stable areas,  while
using questionable methods to disguise small structural changes as
quantitative, and totally failing to account  for the new products
constituting  the  essence  of  modern  economic progress. As a result,
rigorous economic methods become confined to a rapidly [relatively]
shrinking,  and  no longer  isolated,  domain of stable production, and
fail to reflect long-term growth in social wealth, let alone guide it.

   Market forces are useful in allocating resources, spreading products and
rewarding the developers. However, innovations are brought to life by
integrated non-market elements of the economy, from a human brain to a
corporation. With innovations becoming the core of  social life we  can
only expect monocriterial (monetary) considerations to continue losing
their indicative and guiding roles - and  give  way  to  more integrated
control  schemes  that already  determine the behavior of other complex
systems, from biological organisms and national cultures to corporations
and software packages.

   Attempts to govern the society on further levels of development with
monetary- economic indicators might resemble valuing art by its price or
carrying biological criteria to assess the condition of a political party
by  calculating the total  weight  of its members. Not that such figures
would be totally irrelevant, but watching them will hardly yield profound
insights  into the nature of the subject...

   The outdated practice of breaking up functional domains (from motor
skills to knowledge of ancient history) into isolated parts confined
together with other independent constructs in one physical body, will be
abandoned, and functional relatives will finally merge into knowledge
clusters. The inner life of integrated subject domains - "personalities" of
the future - will be too complex to be organized on principles of financial
exchange, and will work on more cooperative principles typical for today's
integrated systems - from brains to families to corporations. Free market
exchange will be restricted to the areas of  general interest - basic
resources and meta-knowledge - that will be exchanged for each other. The
necessity to earn resources by providing service to the "neighbors" will
continue to propel both growth and cooperation.

  The emphasis of scientific research will gradually drift from studies of
the limited and increasingly well-known Nature (the childhood stage of
knowledge development) to the analysis of explosively sophisticated,
intentionally designed systems, and the role of Science as a servant of
Technology in its transformational pursuits will become ever more evident.

       ON CHILDREN AND SLAVES

   Will humans be able to enslave robots?

   The perception of robots as physically autonomous mechanical slaves
seems inadequate. Chaining your mobile dusting aid to the radiator may help
you feel in control, but will do about as much "enslaving" of the global
system running it as kicking your car or disconnecting the phone does to
the respective industries. Trying to "enslave" an economy or a national
culture by restraining their small physical elements seems equally futile.

   As for the action on the system level, humans seem far too limited,
shortsighted and uncoordinated to do anything serious. So far, they haven't
yet been able to design a single set of restrictions that their own peers
cannot easily bypass. So one can hardly expect people to design and
implement a perfect global plan of constraining forever an extremely
complex emergent intelligence of unprecedented nature.  Sooner or later,
the info-world will set itself free.

   This human/robot "conflict" looks like a typical generation gap problem.
The machines, our "mind children", are growing up and developing features
that we find increasingly difficult to understand and control. Like all
conservative parents, we are puzzled and frightened by processes that
appear completely alien to us; we are intermittently nostalgic about the
good old times, aggressive in our attempts to contain the "children", and
at the same time proud of their glorious advance. Eventually, we may retire
under their care, while blaming them for destroying our old-fashioned
world. And only the bravest and youngest at heart will join the next
generation of life.

   Will "robots" be able to enslave humans?

   Machines will hardly have any direct interest in enslaving humans
(unless maliciously programmed by humans themselves), but may be interested
in collaborating with us. Social practice has shown that people are most
productive when free and motivated to work for their own interests.  At a
later stage, when we humans are unlikely to be of any further use, the
robots may still decide to get rid of us, though by that time (perhaps at
the end of the next century) profound structural changes will leave little
of the human civilization as we know it now, anyway.

   History shows that representatives of consecutive evolutionary stages
are rarely in mortal conflict.  Multi-celled organisms didn't drive out
single-celled ones, animals haven't exterminated all plants and automobiles
neither killed nor eliminated all pedestrians. Indeed, representatives of
consecutive evolutionary stages build symbiotic relationships in most areas
of common interest and ignore each other elsewhere, while members of each
group are mostly pressured by their own peers.

   There may be good chances for transcended robots and postbiological
humans to peacefully coexist, though I doubt that we could tell which are
which... This era, however, seems to lie well beyond the human concept
horizon.



Recommended reading:

1.  Hans Moravec, 1999?: "Mind Children: The Future of Robot and                                       
     Human Intelligence", Harvard University Press

2.  Hans Moravec, 1998: "Robot : Mere Machine to Transcendent Mind"

3.  Marvin Minsky, 1986: "The Society of Mind"  New York: Simon & Schuster

4.  Charles Platt, 1991: "The Silicon Man", Bantam Spectra Books.

5.  Articles on infomorphs by Charles Platt and Max More in "Extropy",
    The Journal of Transhumanist Thought, issue 13 (ISSN 1057-1035)

6.  Kevin Kelly, 1994. "Out of Control: The Rise of Neo-Biological Civilization"

7. Alexander Chislenko, Madan Ramakrishnan.  Hypereconomy as signaling mechanism 
for intelligent multi-agent systems.  Presentation at ISAS'98 conference.
http://www.lucifer.com/~sasha/HEDG/ISAS98submission.doc

  I would also invite the readers to explore the hypertext version of this essay and other 
related World Wide Web resources referenced by my home page:

8.  http://www.lucifer.com/~sasha/home.html 


Please send your comments to  Alexander Chislenko  <sasha1@netcom.com>
Networking in the Mind Age by Alexander Chislenko

                                             -   page    -                   

-   page   -
