	 Identity and trans-temporal self[?]-coercion.
	 

   Do you have a right to sell yourself into slavery?

I saw a number of debates on this issue and most likely missed many more.
Hope the following points contribute something new.

  In my understanding, all sides of this debate argue over what a person
can be allowed to do to *hirself*.

  I do not agree though that I must consider whatever-my-body-with-all-
its-contents-may-ever-transform-to  *myself*.   However, I may identify
with the successive consciousnesses inhabiting the successive states of
my current body to *a certain degree*.

  If this degree is *high*, the traditional view of trans-temporal Self
stays relevant. I may call tomorrow's me 'myself' and will claim a right to
swap resources between Me-now and Me-then freely (e.g., lend/borrow money,
sign contracts or figure out whether to wash dishes or see a movie today
or tomorrow). In this case, however, I-now would protect Me-then and won't,
e.g., sell him for torturous experiments for a scoop of ice-cream.

  However, I-now may identify with Me-then to a very *small* extent, or
not at all, depending on the time span between Now and Then, expected
personal transformations, my habitual planning span, my culture, current
mood, etc.   This is the case when I-now can choose to abuse Him-then.
(Him isn't Me anymore!).  I will not pay *my* money to provide His
[cryonic sus]pension, but I will gladly look for pleasure that He will
have to pay for.   He isn't me, and I'll gladly abuse him as I would any
other stranger I manage to get power over.

  It seems that in this case I have as much right to sell my future self
into slavery as I have to enslave anybody else.
  This seems to be a clear case of trans-temporal coercion.

  Readiness so betray one's future interests for the sake of current
pleasures presents a good litmus test for such identity split.

  It seems clear then  that any true libertarian should be against such
behavior and should attempt to protect Future Folks from forced obligations
and other situations they may feel horrified to find themselves in.

  It isn't easy however to protect yet-inexisting people from the
current folks.  So far, this protection has been being provided by the
evolutionary and social pressure.  This protection may be gradually
weakening though, as the pressures relax and rapid personal change
and shortening prognostic horizons weaken the feeling of contiguous
life-time identity.

  In an absolutely free society of immortal rapidly transforming beings
the 'self'-abuse may be quite popular.

  So there may be a growing need for the Identity Enforcement Police.


Sasha,
        who has no pension plan and doesn't care.

		- Alexander Chislenko as of 09/29/94  <sasha1@netcom.com>
		  
          (Later updated by a few other people with the same name).

Home page: http://www.lucifer.com/~sasha/home.html